TO:  Honorable Mayor and City Council  FROM:  Joe Rois, 
        City Auditor 
       
  SUBJECT:  Biennial Peer Review of the  DATE: August 4, 2021 
    City Auditor’s Office 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION  
Approve the attached agreement with the Association of Local Government Auditors (ALGA) to perform 
an audit of the City Auditor's Office for Fiscal Year 2019-20 and FY 2020-21, pursuant to the peer review 
guidelines of ALGA, in exchange for reimbursement of expenses for the audit team and the provision of 
reciprocal audit services by the City Auditor's Office. 
BACKGROUND 
City Charter Section 805.2 requires the City Council to contract with an independent audit firm, which 
has no other contracts with the City, to conduct a performance audit of the City Auditor's Office at least 
every two years.  An audit team associated with ALGA performed the last audit in San José two years 
ago.  
The ALGA peer review provides a mechanism for skilled and qualified audit personnel to perform audits 
of other local government audit organizations.  ALGA is prepared to send a team of two government 
auditors to conduct an audit of the San Jose City Auditor's Office beginning November 1, 2021.   
The objectives of the review will be to determine whether, during the period (July 1, 2019 to June 30, 
2021), the San Jose City Auditor’s internal quality control system was suitably designed and operating 
effectively to provide reasonable assurance of complying with applicable Generally Accepted Government 
Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller General of the United States. 
The peer review team will select and review several audits the City Auditor issued in Fiscal Years 2019-
20 and 2020-21, and submit a written report of the results to the City Council.  
COST IMPLICATIONS  
As a recipient of an ALGA peer review, the City of San Jose incurs two obligations.  First, the City must 
pay for the travel, lodging, meals, and other expenses of the audit team.  The City Auditor's Office 
estimates that these expenses will be approximately $5,000.  The City will not be charged for the audit 
team's time.  Second, the San José City Auditor's Office will be committed to providing up to two auditors 
to participate in similar peer reviews at another jurisdiction within the next two years. 
 
   Joe Rois 
  City Auditor 
0780M