COUNCIL AGENDA:  8/24/2021 
 
  FILE:  21-1823 
  ITEM:  3.3 
 
  TO:  HONORABLE MAYOR AND  FROM:  Jennifer A. Maguire 
    CITY COUNCIL 
 
  SUBJECT:  SEE BELOW  DATE:  August 11, 2021 
                           
 
 
SUBJECT:   RECOGNITION OF JUNETEENTH AS A CITY-OBSERVED HOLIDAY 
EFFECTIVE JUNE 19, 2022 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
Adopt a resolution recognizing Juneteenth as a City-observed holiday effective June 19, 2022.  
 
 
OUTCOME 
 
Adoption of the resolution and authorization to approve the recognition of Juneteenth as a City-
observed holiday will result in a 15th paid City holiday for eligible City employees, effective 
June 19, 2022. 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Juneteenth — also known as Freedom Day or Emancipation Day — has been a tradition in the 
Black/African American community throughout the United States for more than 150 years.  It is 
the oldest known celebration of the ending of slavery and specifically celebrates June 19, 1865, 
when General Gordon Granger delivered the message in Galveston, Texas that enslaved people 
were free.  This was more than two years after enslaved people were officially freed in the south 
by the Emancipation Proclamation on January 1, 1863.   
 
June 17, 2021 is also a historic day, as on this day President Joseph R. Biden, Jr. signed the 
Juneteenth National Independence Day Act making Juneteenth (June 19th) a federal holiday.  
 
 
 
 
 
 HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
August 11, 2021 
Subject:  Recognition of Juneteenth as a City-Observed Holiday Effective June 19, 2022 
Page 2 of 3 
 
ANALYSIS 
 
The City of San José currently observes 14 holidays, including all federally-observed holidays. 
City employees are provided with paid time off on these holidays, except for those employees 
who are in unbenefited classifications or employees that are in classifications that are eligible to 
receive Holiday-In-Lieu Pay. This is in addition to other paid time off that is provided to eligible 
City employees, such as personal leave and executive leave. While the addition of a City-
observed holiday will impact some City services as some City facilities, such as City Hall, 
library branches and community centers, will be closed to the public on the observed holiday, it 
is not expected to disrupt any of the City’s essential services, such as those provided by the 
Police Department, Fire Department, Airport, and the Environmental Services Department.  
 
Honoring Juneteenth and recognizing it as a City-observed holiday will provide the City with an 
opportunity to reflect on the inequality and inhumanity of slavery. It will also allow for the 
opportunity to commemorate emancipation and celebrate the contributions that Black and 
African Americans make every day towards the betterment of our City. While there is still much 
more progress to be made, this is an important step towards recognizing structural and systemic 
racism and ensuring the City applies racial equity practices that ultimately improve outcomes for 
the Black/African American community. 
 
 
CONCLUSION   
 
It is recommended that the Council adopt the Administration’s recommendation outlined in this 
memorandum, which would result in recognizing Juneteenth as a paid City-observed holiday for 
eligible City employees effective June 19, 2022.  
 
 
EVALUATION AND FOLLOW-UP 
 
No additional follow up action with the City Council is expected at this time.   
 
 
CLIMATE SMART SAN JOSE   
 
The recommendation in this memo has no effect on Climate Smart San José energy, water, or 
mobility goals. 
 
 
PUBLIC OUTREACH  
 
This memorandum will be posted on the City's website for the August 24, 2021, City Council 
Agenda. 
 
 
 
 HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
August 11, 2021 
Subject:  Recognition of Juneteenth as a City-Observed Holiday Effective June 19, 2022 
Page 3 of 3 
 
COORDINATION 
 
This memorandum was coordinated with the City Attorney’s Office, the City Manager’s Budget 
Office, the City Manager’s Office of Racial Equity, and the City Manager’s Office of Employee 
Relations.   
 
 
COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION/INPUT 
 
This agreement was not coordinated with any board or commission. 
 
 
COST IMPLICATIONS 
 
The increased cost of adding a 15th paid City-observed holiday is expected to be absorbed in 
each Department’s existing budget and would be dependent on the loss of productivity from 
those employees who are eligible to observe the holiday. The increased cost related to those 
employees who will be required to work on the holiday is estimated to be approximately 
$130,000.  
 
 
CEQA 
 
Not a Project, File No. PP17-010, City Organizational and Administrative activities resulting in 
no changes to the physical environment. 
 
 
 
 
                JENNIFER A. MAGUIRE 
                Acting City Manager 
 
 
For questions, please contact Jennifer Schembri, Director of Employee Relations and Human 
Resources, at (408) 535-8150.