NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
RESOLUTION NO. ______ 
 
A  RESOLUTION  OF  THE  COUNCIL  OF  THE  CITY  OF 
SAN JOSE  CERTIFYING  THE  WEST  SAN  CARLOS 
STREET  MIXED-USE  PROJECT  ENVIRONMENTAL 
IMPACT  REPORT  AND  MAKING  CERTAIN  FINDINGS 
CONCERNING  SIGNIFICANT  IMPACTS,  MITIGATION 
MEASURES,  AND  ALTERNATIVES,  AND  ADOPTING  A 
STATEMENT OF OVERRIDING CONSIDERATIONS AND A 
RELATED MITIGATION MONITORING AND REPORTING 
PROGRAM,  ALL  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH  THE 
CALIFORNIA  ENVIRONMENTAL  QUALITY  ACT,  AS 
AMENDED 
 
 
WHEREAS, the proposed West San Carlos Street Mixed-Use Project (File No.  SP20-
004) includes a Special Use Permit to allow  the demolition of the existing structures on-
site  including  eight  residential  buildings  that  are  candidate  City  Landmarks,  three 
commercial  buildings totaling  approximately  7,600  square  feet,  a  billboard,  and  the 
removal  of  fourteen  on-site  trees  and  the  construction  of  two  seven-story 
residential/commercial mixed-use buildings consisting of 173 residential units and 17,836 
square feet of commercial retail space and a 42 percent parking reduction located at 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Street on an approximately 1.32-gross acre site in the City 
of San José, California (collectively referred to herein as the “Project”; and  
 
WHEREAS, approval of the Special Use Permit would constitute a Project under the 
provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, together with State and 
local implementation, guidelines, and policies promulgated thereunder, all as amended 
to date (collectively “CEQA”); and  
 
WHEREAS,  the  City  is  the  lead  agency  for  the  Project  and  has  prepared  a  Final 
Environmental Impact Report for the Project pursuant to and in accordance with CEQA, 
which the Final Environmental Impact Report is comprised of the Draft Environmental 
 
  1 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
Impact Report for the project (the “Draft EIR”), together with the First Amendment to the 
Draft EIR (collectively, all of said documents are referred to herein as the “FEIR”); and   
 
WHEREAS, on July 14, 2021, the Planning Commission of the City of San José reviewed 
the FEIR prepared for the West San Carlos Street Mixed-Us Project and recommended 
to the City Council that it find the environmental clearance for the proposed Project was 
completed in accordance with the requirements of CEQA and further recommended the 
City Council adopted this Resolution; and  
 
WHEREAS, CEQA requires that, in connection with approval of a project for which an 
environmental impact report has been prepared that identifies one or more significant 
environmental effects of the project, the decision-making body of a public agency make 
certain findings regarding those effects and adopt avoidance measures to minimize 
impacts consistent with City policies and requirements and a statement of overriding 
considerations for any impact that may not be reduced to a less than significant level; 
 
NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  RESOLVED  BY  THE  COUNCIL  OF  THE  CITY  OF 
SAN JOSE: 
1.  That the above recitals are true and correct; and 
2.  That the City Council does hereby find and certify that the FEIR has been prepared 
and completed in compliance with CEQA; and 
3.  The  City  Council  was  presented  with,  and  has  independently  reviewed  and 
analyzed the FEIR and other information in the record and has considered the 
information contained therein, including the written and oral comments received at 
the public hearings on the FEIR and the Project, prior to acting upon or approving 
the Project, and has found that the FEIR represents the independent judgement of 
the City of San José (“City”) as lead agency for the Project, and designated the 
Director of Planning, Building, and Code Enforcement at the Director’s Office at 
200 East Santa Clara Street, 3rd Floor Tower, San José, California 95113, as the 
custodian of documents and record of proceedings on which the decision of the 
City is based; and 
 
  2 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
4.  That the City Council does hereby find and recognize that the FEIR contains 
additions, clarifications, modifications, and other information in its response to 
comments on the Draft EIR or obtained by the City after the Draft EIR was issued 
and circulated for public review and does hereby find that such changes and 
additional  information  are  not  significant  new  information  as  that  phrase  is 
described under CEQA because such changes and additional information do not 
indicate that any of the following would result from approval and implementation of 
the Project: (i) any new significant environmental impact or substantially more 
severe environmental impact not already disclosed and evaluated in the Draft EIR, 
(ii) any feasible mitigation measure considerably different from those analyzed in 
the Draft EIR that would lessen a significant environmental impact of the Project 
has been proposed and would not be implemented, or (iii) any feasible alternative 
considerably different from those analyzed in the Draft EIR that would lessen a 
significant environmental impact of the Project has been proposed and would not 
be implemented; and 
5.  That the City Council does hereby find and determine that recirculation of the FEIR 
for further public review and comment is not warranted or required under the 
provisions of CEQA; and 
6.  That the City Council does hereby make the following findings with respect to the 
significant effects of the environment of the Project, as identified in the FEIR with 
the understanding that all of the information in this Resolution is intended as a 
summary  of  the  full  administrative  record  supporting  the  FEIR;  which  full 
administrative record should be consulted for the full details supporting these 
findings.  
 
WEST SAN CARLOS MIXED-USE PROJECT 
SIGNIFICANT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS 
 
Air Quality 
Impact:  AQ-1.1:  Construction activities associated with the proposed project would 
expose the maximally exposed individuals near the project site to cancer 
risk and PM10 exhaust in excess of BAAQMD single-source thresholds of 
greater than 10.0 per million and greater than 0.3 μg/m3, respectively (108.6 
per million increased cancer lifetime risk and 0.87 μg/m3, respectively) 
without mitigation. 
 
Impact:   AQ(C)-1:  The maximum cancer risk and annual PM  concentration 
10
would exceed the BAAQMD threshold for cumulative sources for cancer 
 
  3 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
lifetime risk (more than 100 per million) and PM  exhaust (more than 0.8) 
10
without mitigation 
 
Mitigation:  MM AQ-1.1:   Prior  to  the  issuance of  any  demolition,  grading,  and/or 
buildings permits (whichever occurs first), the project applicant shall submit 
a construction operations plan that includes specifications of the equipment 
to be used during construction to the Director of Planning, Building and 
Code  Enforcement  or  the  Director’s  designee.  The  plan  shall  be 
accompanied by a letter signed by an air quality specialist, verifying that the 
equipment included in the plan meets a fleet-wide average of 93 percent 
reduction in diesel particulate matter (DPM). Feasible methods to achieve 
this reduction would include the following: 
1.  All  diesel-powered  off-road  equipment,  larger  than  25  horsepower, 
operating on the site for more than two days continuously shall, at a 
minimum, meet U.S. EPA particulate matter emissions standards for 
Tier 4 interim engines or equivalent. 
2.  Provide electric power to avoid use of diesel-powered generator sets 
and other portable equipment. 
3.  Alternatively, equipment that meets U.S. EPA Tier 3 engines standards 
for  particulate  matter  that  include  CARB-certified  Level  3  Diesel 
Particulate Filters or use of equipment that is electrically powered or 
uses non-diesel fuels would meet this requirement. 
 
Finding:  With implementation of Mitigation Measure AQ-1.1, PM  and cancer risk 
10
exposure to nearby sensitive receptors associated with the construction of 
the Project would be reduced to less than significant levels.  Additionally, 
the  Implementation  of  Mitigation  Measure  AQ-1.1  would  reduce  the 
Project’s impact to the cumulative exposure of nearby sensitive receptors 
to  toxic  air  contaminants  to  a  less  than-significant  level.  (Less  than 
Significant with Mitigation Incorporated)  
 
Facts in Support of the Finding: As discussed in Section 3.3 of the DEIR and the Air 
Quality Analysis (Appendix B of the DEIR), implementation of Mitigation 
Measure AQ-1.1, would reduce the maximum increased lifetime cancer 
risks (assuming infant exposure) and maximum increased annual PM  
2.5
emission associated with the Project construction activities to the off-site 
Maximally Exposed Individual (MEI) to 3.6 per million and 0.13 μg/m3, below 
the BAAQMD single-source thresholds of 10.0 per million and 0.3 μg/m3, 
respectively.  Implementation  of  Mitigation  Measure  AQ-1.1  would  also 
reduce the maximum increased cumulative lifetime cancer risks and annual 
PM  concentration impacts to a less than significant level, from 131.8 per 
10
 
  4 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
million to 26.8 per million and 1.4 to 0.66 μg/m3 which  are below the 
BAAQMD cumulative thresholds of more than 100 per million and more than 
0.8 μg/m3, respectively.  
 
Biological Resources 
Impact:  Impact  BIO-1:  Project  construction  could  impact  nesting  birds  on  or 
adjacent to the site, if present. 
 
Mitigation:  MM BIO-1.1: Avoidance: The project applicant shall schedule demolition 
and construction activities to avoid the nesting season. The nesting season 
for most  birds, including most raptors in the San  Francisco Bay area, 
extends from February 1st through August 30th (inclusive). 
 
MM BIO-1.2: Nesting Bird Surveys: Demolition and construction cannot be 
scheduled to occur between September 1 and January 31st (Inclusive), pre-
construction surveys for nesting birds shall be completed by a qualified 
ornithologist  to  ensure  that  no  nests  shall  be  disturbed  during  project 
implementation. This survey shall be completed no more than 14 days prior 
to the initiation of construction activities during the early part of the breeding 
season (February 1st through April 30th inclusive) and no more than 30 days 
prior to the initiation of these activities during the late part of the breeding 
season (May 1st through August 30th inclusive). During this survey, the 
ornithologist  shall  inspect  all  trees  and  other  possible  nesting  habitats 
immediately adjacent to the construction areas for nests.  
 
MM BIO-1.3: Buffer Zones: If an active nest is found sufficiently close to 
work areas to be disturbed by construction, the ornithologist, in consultation 
with the California Department of Fish and Wildlife, shall determine the 
extent of a construction free buffer zone to be established around the nest, 
typically 250 feet, to ensure that raptor or migratory bird nests shall not be 
disturbed during project construction. 
 
MM BIO-1.4: Reporting: Prior to any tree removal, or approval of any 
grading permits (whichever occurs first), the ornithologist shall submit a 
report indicating the results of the survey and any designated buffer zones 
to the satisfaction of the City’s Director of Planning, Building and Code 
Enforcement or the Director’s designee.  
 
Finding:  Implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-1.1 through BIO-1.4 would 
reduce potential impacts to nesting migratory birds to a less than 
significant level. (Less than Significant with Mitigation Incorporated) 
 
  5 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
Facts in Support of the Finding: As discussed in Section 3.4, Biological Resources of 
the Draft EIR, construction disturbance and project tree removal during 
avian breeding season could result in the incidental loss of eggs or nestlings 
either directly. Scheduling construction and tree removal/pruning activities 
outside of the nesting season would avoid disturbance to nesting birds. If 
construction activities cannot be scheduled to occur outside of the nesting 
season,  conducting  pre-construction  surveys  and  implementing  a 
construction-free buffer zone around any migratory bird nests will ensure 
that  raptor  and  migratory  bird  nests  are  not  disturbed  during  project 
construction, under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act and California Fish and 
Game Code. The size of the buffer zones will be determined by consultation 
between the qualified ornithologist and the CDFW and based on scientific 
evidence  and  best  management  practices.  Compliance  with  Mitigation 
Measures BIO-1.1-1.4 would avoid impacts to nesting birds. 
 
 
Cultural Resources 
Impact:  CUL-1:  Implementation  of  the  proposed  project  would  result  in  the 
demolition of the Craftsman-style house and the seven Spanish Revival- 
style  bungalows  on-site  that  are  eligible  City  Landmarks,  a  significant 
impact.  
 
CUL(C)-1:  Implementation  of  the  proposed  project  would  result  in  a 
cumulatively considerable contribution to a significant cultural resources 
impact to the remaining Craftsman-style houses and bungalow courts in the 
City. 
 
Mitigation:  MM CUL-1.1: The project applicant shall implement the following measures 
prior to any demolition permits for the Craftsman-style house and seven 
Spanish Revival-style bungalow units on-site.  
 
Documentation: The structures shall be documented in accordance with the 
guidelines established for the Historic American Building Survey (HABS) 
and shall consist of the following components:  
 
1.  Drawings – Prepare sketch floor plans.  
2.  Photographs  –  Digital  photographic  documentation  of  the  interior, 
exterior, and setting of the buildings in compliance with the National 
Register Photo Policy Fact Sheet. Photos must have a permanency 
rating of approximately 75 years.  
3.  Written Data – HABS written documentation in short form.  
 
  6 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
This documentation shall be prepared by a professional historic resources 
consultant who meets the Secretary of Interior’s Professional Qualifications 
Standards. The report shall be deposited with History San José and a copy 
provided to the City’s Planning Division as well as filed with the Northwest 
Information Center, Sonoma State University. 
 
Relocation by a Third Party: The structures shall be advertised for relocation 
by a third party. The project applicant shall advertise the availability of the 
structure for a period of no less than 30 days. The advertisements must 
include a newspaper of general circulation, a website, and notice on the 
project site and must be reviewed by the City’s Historic Preservation Officer 
or  Environmental  Review  Supervising  Planner  prior  to  circulation.  The 
project applicant shall provide evidence to City staff that this condition has 
been met prior to the issuance of any demolition permits.  
 
If a third party does agree to relocate one or more of the structures the 
following measures must be followed: 
 
1.  The City’s Director of Planning, Building and Code Enforcement, based 
on  consultation  with  the  City’s  Historic  Preservation  Officer,  must 
determine that the receiver site(s) are suitable for the building(s). 
2.  Prior to relocation, a historic preservation architect and a structural 
engineer shall undertake an existing condition study. The purpose of the 
study shall be to establish the baseline condition of the buildings prior to 
relocation. The documentation shall take the form of written descriptions 
and  visual  illustrations,  including  those  character-defining  physical 
features of the resource that convey its historic significance and must be 
protected and preserved. The documentation shall be reviewed and 
approved by the City of San José prior to the structures being moved. 
Documentation already completed will be used to the extent possible to 
avoid repetition in work. 
3.  To protect the buildings during relocation, the third party shall engage a 
building mover who has experience moving similar historic structures. A 
structural engineer will also be engaged to determine if the buildings 
need to be reinforced/stabilized before the move. 
4.  The project applicant shall offer financial assistance for the relocation 
that is equal to a reasonable cost of demolition of the structure(s). 
5.  Once moved, the building shall be repaired and restored, as needed, in 
conformance  with  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior’s  Standards  for  the 
Treatment of Historic Properties. In particular, the character-defining 
 
  7 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
features shall be restored in a manner that preserves the integrity of the 
features for the long-term preservation of these features.  
Upon completion of the repairs, a qualified architectural historian shall 
document and confirm that renovations of the structure(s) were completed 
in  conformance  with  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior’s  Standards  for  the 
Treatment of Historic Properties and that all character-defining features 
were preserved and submit a memo report to the Director of Planning, 
Building and Code Enforcement or Director’s designee.  
 
Salvage: If no third party relocates the structure(s), the structure(s) shall be 
made available for salvage to salvage companies facilitating the reuse of 
historic building materials. The time frame available for salvage shall be 
established by the City of San José Department of Planning, Building and 
Code Enforcement. The project applicant must provide evidence to the 
Director  of  Planning,  Building,  and  Code  Enforcement  or  Director’s 
designee that this condition has been met prior to the issuance of demolition 
permits.  
 
Finding:    Even with implementation of the identified mitigation measures; demolition 
or salvage of the Craftsman-style single-family residence and the seven 
bungalow units at 1530 West San Carlos Street would remain a significant 
unavoidable impact because the residences would be permanently lost. 
Relocation of the structures, while preserving the structures in a different 
location,  would  result  in  a  loss  of  connection  to  its  current  location. 
Specifically, the structures would no longer be recognized as a residence 
associated with the City’s agricultural past and early 20th century residential 
development of West San Carlos Street, which post-war development has 
replaced.   (Significant and Unavoidable Impact) 
 
Facts in Support of the Finding:  The residences at 1530 West San Carlos Street, 
including  the  Craftsman-style  single-family  residence  and  the  seven 
identical bungalows, as discussed in Section 3.5 of the DEIR, have been 
determined to be candidate City Landmarks per the Historic Resources 
Evaluation prepared by Treanor HL on April 10, 2019 and updated July 29, 
2019, because they meet the local eligibility criteria as defined in Section 
13.48.110.H of the San José Municipal Code, having significance for its 
character, interest or value as part of the local, regional state or national 
history, heritage or culture; embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of 
an  architectural type or specimen; and its embodiment  of elements of 
architectural or engineering design, detail, materials or craftsmanship which 
represents a significant architectural innovation or which is unique. The 
Secretary  of  Interior’s  (SOI’s)  standards  for  the  Treatment  of  Historic 
 
  8 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
Properties includes four treatments: preservation, rehabilitation, restoration 
and  reconstruction.  Preservation  refers  to  maintain  the  existing  form, 
integrity  and  materials  of  a  historic  property.  Rehabilitation  allows  for 
compatible use for a property through repair, alterations, and additions while 
preserving  its  historical  features.  Restoration  is  the  act  of  accurately 
depicting  a  property  as  it  appeared  at  a  particular  period  of  time. 
Reconstruction refers to constructing a new building for the purpose of 
replicating a historic building’s appearance as a specific period of time. The 
project proposes to demolish all eight residential structures on-site which 
are  candidate  City  Landmark  structures  without  preserving,  restoring, 
rehabilitating, or reconstructing any portions of the historic buildings. While 
Mitigation  Measure  CUL-1.1  would  help  to  retain  the  memory  of  the 
buildings  and  their  association  with  the  City’s  history,  the  loss  of  the 
buildings  and  their  association  with  the  project  site  would  remain  a 
significant and unavoidable impact. 
 
Hazards and Hazardous Materials 
 
Impact:  Impact HAZ-1: Construction activities associated with the proposed project 
could  expose  construction  workers  and  nearby  land  uses  related  to 
hazardous  materials  associated  with  the  previous  auto  shop  and 
agricultural uses during earthwork activities.  
 
Mitigation:  MM  HAZ-1.1:  Prior  to  the  commencement  of  earthwork  activities,  the 
project  applicant  shall  hire  a  qualified  professional  to  develop  a  Site 
Management Plan that includes:  
1.  Stockpile  management  including  dust  control,  sampling,  stormwater 
pollution prevention and the installation of BMPs; 
2.  Proper disposal procedures of contaminated materials; 
3.  Monitoring, reporting, and regulatory oversight notifications; 
4.  A health and safety plan for each contractor working at the site that 
addresses  the  safety  and  health  hazards  of  each  phase  of  site 
operations  with  the  requirements  and  procedures  for  employee 
protection; and 
5.  The  health  and  safety  plan  will  also  outline  proper  soil/  and  or 
groundwater handling procedures and health and safety requirements 
to minimize worker and public exposure to contaminated soil/and or 
groundwater during construction. 
 
  9 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
 
The Site Management Plan shall be submitted to the Director of Planning, 
Building  and  Code  Enforcement  or  Director’s  designee  and  the  City’s 
Municipal  Environmental  Compliance  Officer  of  the  Department  of 
Environmental Services.  
 
If any contamination is encountered above appropriate regulatory screening 
levels, then the applicant will notify the Santa Clara County Department of 
Environmental Health and enter into the County Site Cleanup Program. 
Removal of USTs and additional sampling/analysis will be completed under 
County Oversight. Evidence of County oversight shall be provided to the 
Director of  Planning, Building  and  Code Enforcement or  the  Director’s 
designee and the Municipal Environmental Compliance Officer. 
 
Finding:  Implementation of Mitigation Measure HAZ-1.1 would reduce exposure of 
construction workers and nearby residences from contaminated on-site soil 
to  less  than  significant  levels.  (Less  than  Significant  Impact  with 
Mitigation Incorporated) 
 
Facts in Support of the Finding:  According to the analysis in Section 3.9 Hazards and 
Hazardous Materials of the DEIR, the western portion of the site has been 
used for auto commercial uses since the 1950s and contained a former 
underground storage tank (UST). During the Phase II investigation, signs or 
presence of the former UST were not identified. In addition, soil sampling 
was completed to evaluate the potential of carbon chain total petroleum 
hydrocarbons  (TPH-cc),  and/or  volatile  organic  compounds  (VOCs)  to 
contaminate on-site soils. Sampling results show that levels of TPH-cc and 
VOCs were below the applicable environmental screening levels (ESLs). 
Refer  to  Appendix  F  for  additional  details  about  sampling  locations, 
methods, and results. While presence of the UST was not discovered, 
Mitigation Measure HAZ-1.1 would be implemented in the event the UST or 
residual  contamination  from  the  UST  are  discovered  during  project 
earthwork  activities.   Preparation  of a  Site  Management  Plan  for  best 
management  practices  and  health  and  safety  plan  to  educate  on-site 
workers, and potential testing to find out the extent of contaminated soil 
would ensure that impacts from contaminated soil being released into the 
environment during construction would be less than significant.  
 
// 
// 
// 
// 
 
  10 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
Noise 
 
Impact:  Impact  NOI-1:  Project  construction  would  generate  vibration  levels 
reaching up to 1.2 in/sec PPV (within five feet south from project site), in 
exceedance  of  0.2  in/sec  PPV  at  buildings  of  normal  conventional 
construction located within 30 feet of the project site. 
 
Mitigation:  MM NOI-1.1: Equipment Selection. Prior to issuance of any demolition or 
grading permits, the project applicant shall implement the following controls 
to reduce vibration impacts from construction activities: 
1.  Prohibit  impact  or  vibratory  pile  driving.  Drilled  piles  or  mat  slab 
foundations cause lower vibration levels where geological conditions 
permit their use. 
2.  A list of all heavy construction equipment to be used for this project 
known  to  produce  high  vibration  levels  (tracked  vehicles,  vibratory 
compaction, jackhammers, hoe rams, etc.) shall be submitted to the City 
by the contractor. This list shall be used to identify equipment and 
activities that would potentially generate substantial vibration and to 
define the level of effort required for continuous vibration monitoring. 
3.  Place operating equipment on the construction site at least 30 feet from 
vibration-sensitive receptors. 
4.  Use the smallest equipment available to complete the task and minimize 
vibration levels as low as feasible. 
5.  Avoid using vibratory rollers and tampers near sensitive areas. 
6.  Select demolition methods not involving impact tools. 
7.  Modify/design or identify alternative construction methods to reduce 
vibration levels below the limits. 
8.  Avoid dropping heavy objects or materials. 
 
MM NOI-1.2:  Vibration monitoring plan. Prior to issuance of demolition or 
grading  permits,  the  project  applicant  shall  implement  a  construction 
vibration monitoring plan to document condition of conventional properties 
within  30  feet  of  the  project  site  prior  to,  during,  and  after  vibration 
generating construction activities. All plan tasks shall be undertaken under 
the direction of a licensed Professional Structural Engineer in the State of 
California and be in accordance with industry accepted standard methods. 
The construction vibration monitoring plan shall be implemented to include 
the following tasks: 
 
  11 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
1.  Identification of sensitivity to ground-borne vibration of the property. A 
vibration survey (generally described below) shall be performed. 
2.  Performance of a photo survey, elevation survey, and crack monitoring 
survey for the structures within 30 feet of the site. Surveys shall be 
performed prior to, in regular intervals during, and after completion of 
vibration generating construction activities and shall include internal and 
external crack monitoring in the structure, settlement, and distress and 
shall document the condition of the foundation, walls and other structural 
elements in the interior and exterior of said structure. 
3.  Development of a vibration monitoring and construction contingency 
plan to identify where monitoring shall be conducted, set up a vibration 
monitoring  schedule,  define  structure-specific  vibration  limits,  and 
address the need to conduct photo, elevation, and crack surveys to 
document before and after construction. Construction contingencies, 
such as alternative construction methods and equipment, or securing 
the structure, shall be identified for when vibration levels approach the 
limits. 
4.  If vibration levels approach limits, suspend construction and implement 
contingencies to either lower vibration levels or secure the affected 
structure. 
5.  Complete a post-survey on the structure where either monitoring has 
indicated high levels or complaints of damage. Make appropriate repairs 
in  accordance  with  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior’s  Standards  where 
damage has occurred as a result of construction activities. 
6.  The  results  of  all  vibration  monitoring  shall  be  summarized  and 
submitted in a report shortly after substantial completion of each phase 
identified in the project schedule. The report will include a description of 
measurement methods, equipment used, calibration certificates, and 
graphics as required to clearly identify vibration-monitoring locations. An 
explanation of all events that exceeded vibration limits will be included 
together with proper documentation supporting any such claims. 
7.  Designate a person responsible for registering and investigating claims 
of excessive vibration. The contact information of such person shall be 
clearly posted on the construction site. 
 
Finding:        With  implementation  of  Mitigation  Measures  NOI-1.1  and  NOI-1.2  and 
standard permit conditions, vibration generated during the project’s 48-
month construction period would have less than significant impacts on the 
 
  12 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
adjacent  buildings  (Less  than  Significant  Impact  with  Mitigation 
Incorporated) 
 
Facts in Support of the Finding: As discussed in Section 3.13 of the Draft EIR and 
supporting  Noise  and  Vibration  Assessment  prepared  for  the  Project 
(Appendix G of the DEIR), the project would be constructed over a 48-month 
construction  period  divided  into  two  phases.  Identifying  the  sensitive 
buildings adjacent to the project and monitoring vibration activities would 
ensure  that  activities  involving  vibrating  equipment  would  not  cause 
damage to adjacent structures within 30 feet of the project site and that any 
damaged  caused  would  be  repaired.  Using  equipment  with  a  lower 
threshold for vibration impacts would also assist in ensuring that no damage 
would occur from construction activities using vibrating equipment.  
 
 
 
FINDINGS CONCERNING ALTERNATIVES 
 
In order to comply with the purposes of CEQA, it is important to identify alternatives that 
reduce the significant impacts that are anticipated to occur if the project is implemented 
and to try to meet as many of the project’s objectives as possible.  The CEQA Guidelines 
emphasize a common sense approach -- the alternatives should be reasonable, should 
“foster  informed  decision  making  and  public  participation,”  and  should  focus  on 
alternatives that avoid or substantially lessen the significant impacts.   
 
The alternatives analyzed in the DEIR were developed with the goal of being at least 
potentially  feasible,  given  Project  objectives  and  site  constraints,  while  avoiding  or 
reducing the Project’s identified environmental effects.  The following are evaluated as 
alternatives to the proposed Project: 
 
1)  No Project – No Development Alternative 
2)  No Project – Existing Land Use Designation Alternative 
3)  Design Alternative – Relocate and restore five bungalows (historic resources) 
 
1.  No Project – No Development Alternative 
A.  Description of Alternative: The No Project – No Development Alternative would 
retain  the  existing  land  uses  on-site  as  is,  which  includes  the  existing  auto 
commercial, commercial (restaurant), and martial arts studio (commercial), and 
eight residential structures on-site.   
 
  13 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
B.  Comparison  of  Environmental  Impacts:  Under  the  No  Project  –  No 
Development Alternative, none of the impacts of the project would occur including 
the significant and unavoidable impact to cultural resources.   
C.  Finding: This alternative would not meet any of the project objectives because the 
No Project – No Development Alternative would not result in any new development 
on the site. Specifically, this alternative would not allow for the density encouraged 
under  the  General  Plan  designation  and  zoning.  Therefore,  because  this 
alternative would not meet any of the project objectives, this alternative is rejected. 
 
2.  No Project – Existing Land Use Designation Alternative 
 
A.  Description of Alternative: The No Project – Existing Land Use Designation  
Alternative is essentially the same as the proposed project. This alternative was 
proposed  when  the  project  still  included  a  Planned  Development  Rezoning 
application to rezone the site from the existing CP Commercial Pedestrian Zoning 
District and the R-M Multiple Residence Zoning District to a Planned Development 
Zoning District. This alternative maintained the existing zoning districts and would 
have constructed a similar project consistent with the General Plan designation 
and zoning districts. The originally proposed Planned Development Rezoning 
would  have  afforded  the  project  more  flexibility  in  terms  of  site  design  and 
setbacks. Under Assembly Bill 3194, the Housing Accountability Act Amendment, 
effective January 1, 2019, the local governments’ authority is limited and cannot 
reject  or  restrict  housing  development  projects  that  comply  with  applicable 
objective general plan, zoning, and subdivision standards. Therefore, the Planned 
Development rezoning application is no longer required for the project rendering 
this alternative essentially the same as the analyzed project.  
B.  Comparison of Environmental Impacts: Under this alternative, the project would 
remain the same and result in the same impacts.  
C.  Finding: Because rezoning is no longer required, there is no land use designation 
alternative. Importantly, alternatives are alternatives that would feasibly attain most 
of the basic objectives of the project but would avoid or substantially lessen any of 
the significant impacts of the project. Because this alternative does not reduce any 
impacts,  it  is  not  a  reasonable  or  feasible  alternative.  Therefore,  this  non-
alternative is rejected.  
// 
// 
// 
 
  14 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
3. Design Alternative – Relocate and Restore Five of the Seven Historic 
Bungalows 
A.  Description of Alternative: The Design Alternative – Replace and Restore Five 
of the Seven Historic Bungalows would lessen the project’s impact on the historic 
resources by relocating and restoring five of the seven historic Spanish Revival-
style bungalows on the site.  This alternative would require the project to  be 
redesigned in a manner that would preserve the historic resources to the extent 
feasible while still allowing a physically feasible development on the project site. 
The proposed Building 1 of the Project would be redesigned with a reduced 
building footprint to allow five of the historic bungalow units to be relocated and 
preserved on the southern portion of the site. The proposed Building 2 would 
remain the same as the proposed project. The five bungalow units would be 
situated in a horseshoe layout and facing each other to form a central court in the 
middle, recreating a similar court-like court as the existing unit layout. Building 1, 
under this alternative, would have 24 fewer residential units, 11,165 square feet 
less of commercial space, and 18,923 square feet less common space. Building 1 
would include 79 residential units, 10,000 square feet of commercial space, and 
6,000 square feet of common space, which combined with Building 2 would result 
in a density of 111 du/ac and 0.29 commercial floor-area ratio (FAR). Additionally, 
Building 1 would be set back at least 95 feet from the southern property line. 
Building  stories  and  height  would  remain  the  same.  Access  to  the  site  and 
bungalow units would be provided on the proposed driveway on West San Carlos 
Street. This design alternative would preserve five of the seven bungalow units 
and would reduce the impact to the historic resources but not to a less than 
significant level. All other impacts during construction and operation would be 
similar to that of the proposed project.  
B.  Comparison of Environmental Impacts: Under this alternative, five of the seven 
bungalows would be relocated and preserved. Therefore, not all of the historic 
resources (eligible City Landmarks) would be preserved. The design alternative 
would lessen the significant impact to the historic resources; however, all other 
impacts during construction and operation would be similar to that of the proposed 
project.  
C.  Finding: Under the Design Alternative, only some of the project objectives would 
be met or partially met. For instance, Objective 1 which is consistent with the goals 
of  the  West  San  Carlos  Urban  Village  Plan  would  not  be  met  because  the 
commercial FAR would not meet the minimum 0.3 requirement of the Plan. This 
alternative would not meet Objectives 5 and 7 or conform with the conceptual 
paseo envisioned in Figure 2.2-5 of the West San Carlos Urban Village Plan 
because it would relocate the bungalow units to the southern portion of the site 
where the paseo is proposed for the project and Urban Village.  This Design 
 
  15 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
Alternative would meet Objective 2 to provide a minimum density of 111 du/ac. 
The site currently contains approximately 7,600 square feet of commercial uses. 
The Design Alternative would meet Objective 3 because it would include more 
commercial space for tax revenue compared to existing conditions. The Design 
Alternative would also meet Objective 4 because it would be required to replace 
the  existing  sidewalk  on  the  project  frontages  consistent  with  the  City 
requirements, and it would include commercial/retail uses on the West San Carlos 
Street project frontage. The Design Alternative would meet Objective 6 because it 
would  continue  to  be  subject  to  the  West  San  Carlos  Urban  Village  Design 
Guidelines.  This alternative would relocate, preserve, and restore five of the 
historic bungalows on-site. While the preservation would reduce the severity of the 
historic resources lost, the alternative would continue to impact historic resources 
as the single-family home and two other bungalows would be demolished. In 
consideration of the potential for preservation, the objectives this project would 
meet, and the balancing of this alternative against the proposed project and City’s 
need  for  dense,  mixed-use  residential/commercial  projects,  this  alternative  is 
rejected. 
 
Environmentally Superior Project 
The No Project – No Development Alternative would avoid all project impacts, including 
the significant and unavoidable impact to potential historic resources of significance to 
the City of San José. However, per Section 15126.6(e)(2) of the CEQA Guidelines, when 
the no-project alternative is the environmentally superior alternative, another alternative 
shall be identified as the environmentally superior alternative. The Design Alternative – 
Relocation and Preservation of five bungalows would meet most of the project objectives 
and avoid the significant and unavoidable impact of the project. This alternative would 
lessen the significant impacts to the historic resources and support a dense mixed-use 
project near transit which aligns with the City’s Envision San José 2040 General Plan and 
Urban Village goals. Therefore, this alternative is the environmentally superior alternative. 
 
 
MITIGATION MONITORING AND REPORTING PROGRAM 
 
Attached to this Resolution as Exhibit “A” and incorporated and adopted as part of this 
Resolution herein is the Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program (“MMRP”) for the 
Project required under Section 21081.6 of the CEQA Statute and Section 15097(b) of the 
CEQA Guidelines. The MMRP identifies impacts of the Project, corresponding mitigation, 
designation of responsibility for mitigation implementation and the agency responsible for 
the monitoring action. 
 
 
 
  16 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OVERRIDING CONSIDERATIONS 
Pursuant to the provisions of CEQA, the City Council of the City of San José hereby 
adopts and makes the following statement of overriding considerations regarding the 
significant and unavoidable impact of the Project as outlined above and the anticipated 
economic, social, and other benefits of the Project. 
 
A.  Significant Unavoidable Impacts.  With respect to the foregoing findings and in 
recognition of those facts which are included in the record, the City has determined 
the Project has significant unavoidable impacts, as set forth above, associated with 
demolition of eight candidate City Landmark structures. 
B.  Overriding Considerations.  The City Council specifically adopts and makes this 
Statement  of  Overriding  Considerations  that  this  Project  has  eliminated  or 
substantially lessened all significant effects on the environment where feasible, 
and  finds  that  the  remaining  significant  unavoidable  impact  of  the  Project  is 
acceptable  in  light  of  the  economic  and  social  considerations  noted  below, 
because the benefits of the Project outweigh the significant unavoidable impact of 
the Project.  The City Council finds that the overriding considerations set forth 
below constitutes a separate and independent ground for finding that the benefits 
of the Project outweigh its significant unavoidable environmental impact and is an 
overriding consideration warranting approval of the Project.  These matters are 
supported by evidence in the record that includes, but is not limited to, the Envision 
San José 2040 General Plan and to development in the West San Carlos Urban 
Village. 
C.  Benefits of the Proposed Project.  While the City recognizes that there is historic 
value  in  retaining  the  Craftsman-style  single-family  residence  and  the  seven 
Spanish Revival-style bungalows as City Landmarks associated with the City’s 
agricultural past and the advent of the automobile prior to World War II, the City 
has designated growth areas such as the West San Carlos Urban Village for the 
development of dense, mixed-use, multi-modal projects.   The City Council has 
considered the public record of proceedings on the proposed Project and other 
written materials presented to the City as well as oral and written testimony at all 
public  hearings  related  to  the  Project,  and  does  hereby  determine  that 
implementation of the Project as specifically provided in the Project documents 
would result in the following substantial public benefits. 
1)  Provision of a Mixed-Use Project in an Identified Growth Area. Consistent 
with Major Strategy #3 (Focused Growth) of the General Plan, this project 
would provide 173 dwelling units and 17,836 square feet of commercial space 
within two seven-story buildings, sited within a transit priority area, primarily 
served by VTA Bus Routes 23 and 523 (considered major transit stops because 
the routes have headways of 15 minutes during the AM and PM peak commute 
 
  17 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
periods, and is in close proximity to Downtown.  The project would support job 
growth by providing neighborhood-supportive retail spaces along West San 
Carlos Street and provide new housing units to meet the City’s increasing 
housing demand.  
2)  Provision of a Paseo. In addition to the residential/commercial mixed uses, 
the project would include a 30-foot walkway that wraps around the building and 
connects to the proposed driveway and the sidewalk on West San Carlos Street 
to the proposed (private) paseo which is part of the project and envisioned for 
the West San Carlos Urban Village.   
3)  Development in Transit Rich Area and along a Grand Boulevard. The 
project site is located along West San Carlos Street - a Grand Boulevard that 
is served by several bus lines. The project site is also within 1.5 miles from the 
Diridon Transit Depot, a station served by ACE, Caltrain, Greyhound, Amtrak, 
VTA bus lines, and the future BART line.   
4)  Complete Communities.  The proposed development also includes 12,818 
square feet of outdoor common open space and 9,412 square feet of indoor 
amenity space in the proposed buildings, and a 4,450-square foot private 
paseo. The development will also provide on-site parking for vehicles and 
bicycles, both for the residential component and the retail component of the 
project. The project will advance the Envision San José 2040 General Plan 
policies to create a complete community with a mixed-use building with an 
amenity-rich  residential  use  and  new  commercial/retail  uses  placed  within 
walking distance of neighborhoods and the commercial businesses along West 
San  Carlos  Street.  Placing  complementary  land  uses  like  residential  and 
commercial/retail  uses  near  each  other  will  reduce  the  number  of  single-
occupancy automobile trips and  vehicle miles traveled compared with  the 
equivalent amount of development in a more suburban location where uses are 
separated. Less trips would contribute to a  decrease in project-generated 
greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Based on the above, the project would meet the strategies and goals of the Envision San 
José 2040 General Plan and Urban Village criteria of locating high density development 
on infill sites near transit corridors, activating West San Carlos Street by providing ground 
floor retail, and promoting bicycling by providing bicycle parking.  
 
The City Council has weighed each of the above benefits of the proposed Project against 
its significant unavoidable impact identified in the EIR, and hereby determines that these 
benefits outweigh the adverse environmental effect of the Project and, therefore, further 
determines that the adverse environmental effect is acceptable and overridden. 
 
 
 
  18 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
8/3/2021 
 
 
LOCATION AND CUSTODIAN OF RECORDS 
 
The documents and other materials that constitute the record of proceedings on which 
the City Council based the foregoing findings and approval of the Project are located at 
the Department of Planning, Building and Code Enforcement, 200 East Santa Clara 
Street, Third Floor Tower, San José, CA 95113. 
 
 
ADOPTED this            day of           ,           , by the following vote: 
 
 
  AYES:             
 
 
  NOES:             
 
 
  ABSENT:             
 
 
  DISQUALIFIED:             
 
 
     
 
  SAM LICCARDO 
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
 
           
 
TONI J. TABER, CMC 
City Clerk 
 
 
  19 
T-41008.001/1844635 
Council Agenda: 08-24-2021 
Item No.:  10.2(a) 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document. 
 DRAFT--Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final document.