COUNCIL AGENDA:  08/24/2021 
FILE:  21-1826 
   
ITEM:  10.2 
 
 
  TO: HONORABLE MAYOR  FROM:  Planning Commission  
    AND CITY COUNCIL     
     
SUBJECT: SEE BELOW   DATE:  August 2, 2021 
 
       
                           
 
COUNCIL DISTRICT:  6 
 
SUBJECT:  SP20-004. SPECIAL USE PERMIT AND SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT 
TO ALLOW THE DEMOLITION OF THREE EXISTING COMMERCIAL 
BUILDINGS, EIGHT RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS, AND ASSOCIATED 
SERVICE STRUCTURES TOTALING APPROXIMATELY 14,131 SQUARE 
FEET, THE REMOVAL OF 15 TREES (11 ORDINANCE-SIZE, FOUR 
NON-ORDINANCE SIZE) FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF TWO SEVEN-
STORY RESIDENTIAL MIXED-USE BUILDINGS, INCLUDING 173 
RESIDENTIAL UNITS AND 17,836 SQUARE FEET OF COMMERCIAL 
RETAIL SAPCE WITH A 42 PERCENT PARKING REDUCTION ON AN 
APPROXIMATELY 1.34-GROSS ACRE SITE.  
 
 
RECOMMENDATION  
 
The Planning Commission voted 9-0-1-1 (Cantrell Abstain, Ornelas-Wise Absent) to recommend 
that the City Council take all of the following actions: 
 
1.  Adopt a Resolution certifying the West San Carlos Street Mixed-Use Project 
Environmental Impact Report, and making certain findings concerning significant 
impacts, mitigation measures, alternatives, and adopting a statement of overriding 
considerations and a related Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Plan, in accordance 
with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).  
 
2.  Adopt a Resolution approving, subject to conditions, a Special Use Permit  to allow the 
demolition of three existing commercial buildings, eight residential buildings, and 
associated service structures totaling approximately 14,131 square feet, the removal of 15 
trees (11 ordinance-size, four non-ordinance-size) for the construction of two seven-story 
residential mixed use buildings, including 173 residential units and 17,836 square feet of 
commercial retail space with a 42 percent parking reduction on an approximately 1.34-
gross acre site.  
 HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
August 2, 2021 
Subject:  File No. SP20-004 
Page 2 
 
   
OUTCOME  
 
If the City Council approves all the actions listed above as recommended by the Planning 
Commission, the applicant will be able to demolish all existing buildings on-site, including three 
commercial buildings, eight residential buildings, and associated service structures totaling 
approximately 14,131 square feet, remove 15 trees (11 ordinance-size, four non-ordinance-size) 
and construct two seven-story residential mixed use buildings, including 173 residential units 
and 17,836 square feet of commercial retail space with a 42 percent parking reduction on an 
approximately 1.34-gross acre site.  
 
 
BACKGROUND  
 
On July 14, 2021, the Planning Commission held a Public Hearing to consider the resolution 
certifying the Draft Environmental Impact Report and Special Use Permit. The Planning 
Commission recommended that the City Council adopt the resolution certifying the West San 
Carlos Street Mixed-Use Project Environmental Impact Report and related Mitigation 
Monitoring and Reporting Plan and approve the subject Special Use Permit. 
 
Staff Presentation 
Prior to staff presentation, Maira Blanco, Environmental Project Manager, read into the record 
corrections to references to less than significant impacts in the design alternatives section of the 
Special Use Permit and Environmental resolutions. Ms. Blanco also noted that a revised 
Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program (Exhibit H) was attached to the staff memo. 
Finally, two standard environmental permit conditions (#38g and #35) were added to the Special 
Use Permit Resolution. The first condition would require a detailed acoustical study to reduce 
noise emanating from mechanical equipment. The second condition would require the applicant 
to pay the school impact fee. 
 
Alec Atienza, Planning Project Manager, provided a brief oral presentation on the proposed 
project. Staff presentation included an overview of the project’s conformance with the General 
Plan, West San Carlos Street Urban Village Plan, San José Municipal Zoning Code, City Council 
Policy 6-30: Public Outreach, and conformance with the California Environmental Quality Act.   
 
Public Hearing 
The applicant’s representative and project architect, Jeffrey Current, provided a presentation 
covering the existing site conditions, the subject site in the context of the West San Carlos Street 
Urban Village Plan, the proposed project and associated paseo area, and overall architectural 
details.  
 
Four members of the public spoke on the proposed project. The first speaker, a resident of the 
area, asked if there were any controls that would be put in place, such as scaffolding, to ensure 
sidewalk safety during the construction for the project. The speaker mentioned that there were HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
August 2, 2021 
Subject:  File No. SP20-004 
Page 3 
 
   
issues with previous construction projects in the area where pedestrians were forced to walk on 
the street in traffic to go around construction sites.  
 
Two speakers commented on behalf of Catalyze SV. The first speaker commented in support of 
the project and explained that the organization was able to review the project twice. The final 
speaker explained that Catalyze SV evaluates and scores development projects. The speaker was 
also supportive of the project and explained that there are many similar projects in the area with 
similar height and density. 
 
The fourth speaker commented on behalf of Local Union 270 (LIUNA) and stated that the 
Environmental Impact Report failed to address environmental impacts related to indoor and 
outdoor air quality. The speaker requested that the commission refrain from making a 
recommendation until the impacts were adequately addressed. 
   
After the Public Comment, Commission legal counsel Vera Todorov noted that the 
Commissioners received a letter from Local Union 270 (LIUNA) at 4:01 p.m. on July 14, 2021. 
The letter was publicly posted after close of business and staff will respond to the letter. Ms. 
Todorov also noted that the updated attachments mentioned by Maira Blanco at the beginning of 
the staff presentation were publicly posted. 
 
The applicant stated that the goals of the project are closely aligned with the West San Carlos 
Street Urban Village Plan. This includes height, density, uses, and parking. The applicant also 
noted that a new development team has acquired a property adjacent to the subject site to the 
west and has proposed a project that would allow the paseo to become publicly accessible from 
Willard Street.  
 
Maira Blanco provided a response to Local Union 270 letter regarding the EIR. She noted that 
staff did not receive the comment letter until 5:30 pm on July 14, 2021. Ms. Blanco explained 
that the City prepared the EIR for the project in compliance with CEQA. The draft EIR was 
circulated for 45 days from January 12, 2021 through February 26, 2021. Staff did receive 
comments during the circulation period from Lozeau Drury LLP on behalf of LIUNA, 
identifying concerns with indoor air quality impacts, specifically with regards to emissions of 
formaldehyde and the parameters used to estimate project emissions, air quality impact from 
reactive organic gas (ROG) emissions, health risks form diesel particulate matter, and the 
project’s cumulative air quality impacts. Staff responded to these comments in the First 
Amendment to the draft EIR, which is posted on the project webpage. City staff maintained that 
the BAAQMD CEQA Guidelines do not have a threshold for indoor air quality. The project 
would also be constructed in conformance with the most recent California Building Code 
regulations, which specify that composite wood products are required to meet the formaldehyde 
specifications under the California Air Resources Board Air Toxic Control Measures. Finally, 
Maira noted that it is speculative for the City to estimate the type and volume of building 
materials that may contain formaldehyde. A formal response to the rebuttal letter was prepared 
by City staff and is attached to this memorandum.  
 HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
August 2, 2021 
Subject:  File No. SP20-004 
Page 4 
 
   
Commissioner Discussion 
Commissioner Caballero asked the applicant to describe why the paseo cannot be opened to the 
public until the adjacent project is completed. The applicant responded that they were unable to 
acquire the properties needed to extend the paseo to Buena Vista Street. Therefore, the paseo 
would remain private open space until connected to the public street pursuant to the Urban 
Village Plan requirements. Commissioner Caballero asked why the paseo could not be 
constructed behind the building at the corner of West San Carlos and Buena Vista. The applicant 
noted that it would not meet the planned location of the paseo and that two additional properties 
would need to be acquired to extend the paseo to Buena Vista Street.  
 
Commissioner Oliverio then spoke in support of the project and made a motion to approve.  
 
Commissioner Lardinois asked how the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance applies to this project. 
Staff responded that the applicant would still be required to pay the off-site fee. The affordable 
housing agreement would need be finalized prior to a Certificate of Occupancy being issued for 
the building. Commissioner Lardinois asked the applicant why they did not choose to provide 
affordable housing on-site. The applicant responded that the ownership group intends to turn the 
units into owner-occupied condominiums. 
 
Commissioner Torrens said that she enjoys seeing Urban Village Plans built out. Commissioner 
Torrens asked about the in-lieu fee for affordable housing. The applicant responded that they 
would be responsible for paying an off-site in-lieu affordable housing fee of $7.23 million. The 
applicant also reiterated that the units would be owner-occupied.  
 
Commissioner Cantrell asked about the legacy businesses that would be displaced. The applicant 
responded that the restaurant was compensated and moved to a new location on Santa Clara 
Street. The used car sales business moved across the street from the project site. The car rental 
business owner retired and closed the business.  
 
Commissioner Montanez asked about the calculation for required open space. Staff clarified that 
the public, private, and common open space are calculated separately, and the only total sum 
provided is the common open space. Additionally, staff noted that the open space requirements 
are considered guidelines, not standards, and therefore subject to some discretion depending on 
the project and location.   
 
Commissioner Young asked staff to clarify how pedestrians could safely walk in front of the 
building during construction. Joe Provenzano from the Department of Public Works noted that 
the conditions of approval include the submittal of a Site Utilization Plan at the construction 
stage. Public Works staff would evaluate construction impacts to the surrounding neighborhood 
as well as truck access to the construction site. He noted that based on the review of the Site 
Utilization Plan, Public Works may require that pedestrian tunnels be constructed. The contact 
information for the construction site will be available on-site.  
 HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
August 2, 2021 
Subject:  File No. SP20-004 
Page 5 
 
   
Commissioner Lardinois seconded Commissioner Oliverio’s motion to recommend that City 
Council approve the project.  
 
The motion to recommend Council approval of the project was approved (9-0-1-1). 
Commissioner Cantrell abstained and Commissioner Ornelas-Wise was absent.  
 
 
ANALYSIS  
 
Analysis of the proposed CEQA clearance, Special Use Permit, and Site Development Permit 
including conformance with the General Plan, West San Carlos Street Urban Village Plan, 
Zoning Ordinance, and City Council Policies are contained in the attached staff report.   
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The project was heard at the July 14, 2021 Planning Commission Meeting. The motion to 
recommend Council approval of the project passed 9-0-1-1 (Cantrell Abstain, Ornelas-Wise 
Absent).  As discussed in the attached staff report, the project is consistent with the Envision San 
José 2040 General Plan, West San Carlos Street Urban Village Plan, the Zoning Code, applicable 
City Council Policies for Public Outreach, and the requirements of CEQA. Should the City 
Council adopt a resolution certifying the West San Carlos Street Mixed-Use Project 
Environmental Impact Report and approve the Special Permit, the project would be approved to 
allow the demolition of all existing buildings on-site, including three commercial buildings, eight 
residential buildings, and associated service structures totaling approximately 14,131 square feet, 
the removal of 15 trees (11 ordinance-size, four non-ordinance-size) for the construction of two 
seven-story residential mixed use buildings, including 173 residential units and 17,836 square 
feet of commercial retail space with a 42 percent parking reduction on an approximately 1.34-
gross acre site. The applicant could proceed with an application for building permits.   
 
 
EVALUATION AND FOLLOW-UP   
 
Should the City Council adopt the resolution certifying the Final Environmental Impact Report 
and approve the Special Use Permit resolution, the applicant would be allowed to demolish all 
existing buildings on-site, including three commercial buildings, eight residential buildings, and 
associated service structures totaling approximately 14,131 square feet, remove 15 trees (11 
ordinance-size, four non-ordinance-size) and construct two seven-story residential mixed use 
buildings, including 173 residential units and 17,836 square feet of commercial retail space with 
a 42 percent parking reduction on an approximately 1.34-gross acre site. The applicant could 
proceed with an application for Building Permits.  
 
 
 HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
August 2, 2021 
Subject:  File No. SP20-004 
Page 6 
 
   
CLIMATE SMART SAN JOSE  
 
The recommendation in this memorandum aligns with one or more Climate Smart San José 
mobility goals. The project would reduce Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT), facilitate the choice of 
mobility choices other than single-occupancy, gas-powered vehicles, increase the density of new 
development (persons/jobs/acre), and facilitate job creation within City limits by providing high 
density mixed use residential development with commercial retail in a central location within an 
identified growth area (West San Carlos Street Urban Village). The project would also include a 
42% parking reduction with the implementation of a Transportation Demand Management 
(TDM) plan to reduce vehicle trips. 
 
 
PUBLIC OUTREACH   
 
Staff followed Council Policy 6-30: Public Outreach Policy, whereby the project is considered a 
large development proposal. Following City Council Policy 6-30, the applicant posted the on-
site sign to inform the neighborhood of the proposed project.  A notice of the public hearing was 
distributed to the owners and tenants of all properties located within 1,000 feet of the project site 
and posted on the City website. The staff report is also posted on the City’s website. Staff has 
also been available to respond to questions from the public. 
 
A formally noticed Community Meeting including the Environmental Scoping was held on 
January 9, 2020 to introduce the proposed project to the community. Approximately 22 members 
of the public attended the meeting. The questions and comments from community members 
included concerns related to building height, traffic, parking, lack of retail options, and sidewalk 
safety during construction. 
 
 
COORDINATION  
 
Preparation of this memorandum has been coordinated with the City Attorney’s Office.  
 
 
CEQA 
  
The City of San José, as the lead agency for the project, prepared a Draft Environmental Impact 
Report (Draft EIR) (State Clearinghouse Number 2019120341), which was circulated for public 
review and comment for 45 days, from January 12, 2021 through February 26, 2021. 
 
The EIR prepared for this project concluded that implementation of the proposed project would 
result in a significant impact to historic resources (Candidate City Landmarks). Specifically, the 
implementation of the project would result in impacts to candidate City Landmarks located at 
1530 West San Carlos Street: One Craftsman-style house and seven Spanish Revival-style 
bungalows.  HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
August 2, 2021 
Subject:  File No. SP20-004 
Page 7 
 
   
Significant Unavoidable Impacts 
CUL-1:   Implementation of the proposed project would result in the demolition of the 
Craftsman-style house and the seven Spanish Revival- style bungalows on-site that are 
eligible City Landmarks, a significant impact.  
CUL(C)-1:   Implementation of the proposed project would result in a cumulatively 
considerable contribution to a significant cultural resources impact to the remaining 
Craftsman-style houses and bungalow courts in the City. 
  
The EIR determined that demolition of the residences at 1530 West San Carlos Street, eligible as 
candidate City Landmark structures, would be a significant and unavoidable impact. Even 
though mitigation measures that include documentation, relocation, and salvage would lessen the 
impact, the residences and the historic connection to the current location would be lost. 
Therefore, the impact would be significant and unavoidable. 
 
In addition, mitigation measures were developed to lessen the following project impacts to less 
than significant levels: Air Quality, Biological Resources, Hazards and Hazardous Materials, and 
Noise.  
 
Standard Permit Conditions are also required to ensure no significant impacts occur during 
construction and operation of the project. These Standard Permit Conditions include best 
management practices for construction-related air quality impacts, compliance with the Santa 
Clara Valley Habitat Plan, compliance with the California Building Code for seismic safety of 
the proposed building, erosion control during construction activities, protection of unknown 
subsurface resources, protection of construction workers from hazards related to asbestos 
containing materials and lead-based paint, water quality impacts during construction, and 
impacts to public facilities. 
 
CEQA Alternatives 
As required under CEQA, the Draft EIR identified and evaluated alternatives to the project. 
Three critical factors considered in the selection and evaluation of the alternatives included: (1) 
the significant impacts from the project that could be reduced or avoided by an alternative, (2) 
consistency with the project’s objectives, and (3) the feasibility of the alternatives available. The 
environmental analysis considered three project alternatives outlined in the Special Use Permit. 
These include: 
1.  No Project – No Development Alternative 
The No Project – No Development Alternative assumes that the project site would remain as it is 
today, which includes the existing auto commercial, commercial (restaurant), martial arts 
commercial space, and residential developments on-site. Because the No Project – No 
Development Alternative would not result in any new development on the site, this Alternative 
would avoid all of the environmental impacts of the project, including the significant and 
unavoidable impact to potential historic resources of significance to the City of San José.. HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
August 2, 2021 
Subject:  File No. SP20-004 
Page 8 
 
   
However, this Alternative would not meet any of the project objectives. The existing 
development is lower than the density encouraged under the General Plan designation, West San 
Carlos Urban Village Plan, and zoning, since the site currently contains lower commercial FAR 
and fewer dwelling units per acre than the minimum requirement. 
  
2.  No Project – Existing Land Use Designation Alternative 
The No Project – Existing Land Use Designation Alternative is essentially the same as the 
proposed project. This alternative was proposed when the project still included a PD Planned 
Development Zoning application to rezone the site from the existing CP Commercial Pedestrian 
Zoning District and the R-M Multiple Residence Zoning District to a Planned Development 
Zoning District. This alternative maintained the existing zoning districts and would have 
constructed a similar project consistent with the General Plan designation and zoning districts. 
The originally proposed PD zoning would have afforded the project more flexibility in terms of 
site design and setbacks. Under Assembly Bill 3194, the Housing Accountability Act 
Amendment, effective January 1, 2019, the local governments’ authority is limited and cannot 
reject or restrict housing development projects that comply with applicable objective general 
plan, zoning, and subdivision standards.  Because rezoning is no longer required, there is no land 
use designation alternative. It is important to note that CEQA alternatives must feasibly attain 
most of the basic objectives of the project, while avoiding or substantially lessening any of the 
significant impacts of the project. Because this alternative does not reduce any impacts, it is not a 
reasonable or feasible alternative.  
 
3.  Design Alternative – Relocate and restore five of the seven bungalows 
Demolition of the residential units on-site would result in a significant unavoidable impact to 
historic resources. The purpose of the Design Alternative is to avoid the project’s significant 
unavoidable impact to historic resources. The Design Alternative would require the project to be 
redesigned in a manner that would preserve the historic resources to the extent feasible while still 
allowing a physically feasible development on the project site. The proposed Building 1 of the 
Project would be redesigned with a reduced building footprint to allow five of the historic 
bungalow units to be relocated and preserved on the southern portion of the site. The proposed 
Building 2 would remain the same as the proposed project. The five bungalow units would be 
situated in a horseshoe layout and facing each other to form a central court in the middle, 
recreating a similar court-like court as the existing unit layout. Building 1, under this alternative, 
would have 24 fewer residential units, 11,165 square feet less of commercial space, and 18,923 
square feet less common space. Building 1 would include 79 residential units, 10,000 square feet 
of commercial space, and 6,000 square feet of common space, which combined with Building 2 
would result in a density of 111 du/ac and 0.29 commercial FAR. Additionally, Building 1 would 
be set back at least 95 feet from the southern property line. Building stories and height would 
remain the same. Access to the site and bungalow units would be provided on the proposed 
driveway on West San Carlos Street. This design alternative would preserve five of the seven 
bungalow units and would lessen the impact to the historic resources by restoring the buildings 
consistent with the City’s requirements for historic buildings. All other impacts during 
construction and operation would be similar to that of the proposed project. HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
August 2, 2021 
Subject:  File No. SP20-004 
Page 9 
 
   
Circulation and Public Comments 
The Draft EIR was circulated for public review for 45 days consistent with CEQA Guidelines 
Section 15132, starting on January 12, 2021 and ending on February 26, 2021.  Comments were 
received from regional and local agencies, including the County of Santa Clara, Roads and Airport 
Department, the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA), and the Santa Clara Valley 
Water District; and organizations, businesses, and individuals, including a letter from Lozeau 
Drury, LLP. and Pacific Gas & Electric Company (PG&E).  
Issues raised in these comment letters include the following: 
1. County of Santa Clara, Roads and Airport Department: City annexation of project pockets 
to address all neighborhood traffic-related issues within those pockets. Reference to the 
annexation clause within the 2006 Settlement Agreement between the County and the City of 
San José.  
2. VTA: Request for the project to coordinate bus stop improvements to consolidate stop locations 
along West San Carlos Street and opportunity to review updated site plans to ensure the placement of 
driveways, landscaping and any other features do not conflict with bus operations; and comment on the 
proposed crossing at San Carlos Street and Willard Avenue. 
3. Lozeau Drury LLP (dated February 26, 2021) on behalf of the Laborers International 
Union of North America (LiUNA): 1) DEIR fails to discuss indoor air quality impacts related 
to the project, in particular emissions of formaldehyde; 2) DEIR relies on unsubstantiated 
input parameters to estimate project emissions and thus fails to provide substantial evidence 
of the project’s air quality impacts; 3) the DEIR failed to disclose a significant air quality 
impact from Reactive Organic Gas (ROG) emissions; 4) the DEIR fails to adequately 
evaluate health risks from diesel particulate matter emissions; 5) The DEIR inadequately 
evaluated the project’s cumulative impacts.  
 
Response to Public Comments addressed in First Amendment 
In accordance with CEQA Guidelines Section 15088, a First Amendment was prepared to 
provide responses to public comments submitted during the public circulation period and 
revisions to the text of the Draft EIR. As contained within the First Amendment, comments 
received either did not address the adequacy of the Draft EIR or the comment did not identify 
new or more significant impact(s), or a new feasible project alternative or mitigation measure 
considerably different than identified in the DRAFT EIR. For these reasons, no further CEQA 
analysis is required and the Draft EIR does not require recirculation. The Draft EIR taken 
together with the First Amendment constitutes the Final EIR. Although not necessary for CEQA, 
staff also prepared a formal response to Lozeau Drury LLP’s rebuttal letter which reiterates the 
former response.  
  
EIR Recirculation Unnecessary 
The comments received do not identify substantive inadequacies in the Draft EIR or new 
previously unidentified significant impacts that require recirculation. The recirculation of an EIR 
is required when significant new information is added to the EIR after public notice is given of HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
August 2, 2021 
Subject:  File No. SP20-004 
Page 10 
 
   
the availability of the Draft EIR for public review but before certification. “Information” can 
include changes in the project or environmental setting as well as additional data or other 
information. New information added to a Draft EIR is not “significant” unless the Draft EIR is 
changed in a way that deprives the public of meaningful opportunity to comment on a substantial 
adverse environmental effect of the project or a feasible way to mitigate or avoid such an effect 
(CEQA Guidelines Section 15088.5). 
 
Statement of Overriding Considerations 
Section 15091(a) of the CEQA Guidelines stipulates that no public agency shall approve or carry 
out a project for which an EIR has been certified which identifies one or more significant 
environmental effects of the project unless the public agency makes one or more written 
findings. If the lead agency approves a project despite it resulting in significant adverse 
environmental impacts that cannot be mitigated to a less than significant level, the agency must 
state the reasons for its action in writing. Thus, a Statement of Overriding Considerations is 
included in the record of project approval and it is recommended that the City Council adopt the 
resolution with the statement of overriding considerations, certifying the EIR, and adopting the 
mitigation monitoring and reporting plan. 
  
The Draft EIR taken together with the First Amendment constitutes the Final EIR. The Draft EIR 
and First Amendment to the Draft SEIR are available for review on the project page on the 
City’s Active EIRs website at: www.sanjoseca.gov/ActiveEIRs. 
 
 
 
               
              /s/ 
              CHRISTOPHER BURTON, Secretary 
              Planning Commission 
 
 
For questions, please contact Planning Official, Robert Manford, at (408) 535-7900. 
 
Attachments:  Exhibit A – EIR Resolution (corrected) 
    Exhibit B – Special Use Permit Resolution (corrected) 
Exhibit C – Response to Rebuttal Letter to Responses to Draft EIR Comments 
Exhibit D – Planning Commission Staff Report NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
RESOLUTION NO. ______ 
 
A RESOLUTION OF THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN 
JOSE CERTIFYING THE WEST SAN CARLOS STREET 
MIXED-USE  PROJECT  ENVIRONMENTAL  IMPACT 
REPORT  (SCH  #2019120341)  AND  MAKING  CERTAIN 
FINDINGS  CONCERNING  SIGNIFICANT  IMPACTS, 
MITIGATION  MEASURES,  AND  ALTERNATIVES,  AND 
ADOPTING  A  STATEMENT  OF  OVERRIDING 
CONSIDERATIONS  AND  A  RELATED  MITIGATION 
MONITORING  AND  REPORTING  PROGRAM,  ALL  IN 
ACCORDANCE  WITH  THE  CALIFORNIA 
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT, AS AMENDED 
 
 
WHEREAS, the proposed West San Carlos Street Mixed-Use Project (File No.  SP20-
004) includes a Special Use Permit to allow  the demolition of the existing structures on-
site  including  eight  residential  buildings  that  are  candidate  City  Landmarks,  three 
commercial  buildings totaling  approximately  7,600  square  feet,  a  billboard,  and  the 
removal  of  fourteen  on-site  trees  and  the  construction  of  two  seven-story 
residential/commercial mixed-use buildings consisting of 173 residential units and 17,836 
square feet of commercial retail space and a 42 percent parking reduction located at 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Street on an approximately 1.32-gross acre site in the City 
of San José, California (collectively referred to herein as the “Project”; and  
 
WHEREAS, approval of the Special Use Permit would constitute a Project under the 
provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, together with State and 
local implementation, guidelines, and policies promulgated thereunder, all as amended 
to date (collectively “CEQA”); and  
 
WHEREAS,  the  City  is  the  lead  agency  for  the  Project  and  has  prepared  a  Final 
Environmental Impact Report for the Project pursuant to and in accordance with CEQA, 
which the Final Environmental Impact Report is comprised of the Draft Environmental 
 
  1 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: ______ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
Impact Report for the project (the “Draft EIR”), together with the First Amendment to the 
Draft EIR (collectively, all of said documents are referred to herein as the “FEIR”); and   
 
WHEREAS, on July 14, 2021, the Planning Commission of the City of San José reviewed 
the FEIR prepared for the West San Carlos Street Mixed-Us Project and recommended 
to the City Council that it find the environmental clearance for the proposed Project was 
completed in accordance with the requirements of CEQA and further recommended the 
City Council adopted this Resolution; and  
 
WHEREAS, CEQA requires that, in connection with approval of a project for which an 
environmental impact report has been prepared that identifies one or more significant 
environmental effects of the project, the decision-making body of a public agency make 
certain findings regarding those effects and adopt avoidance measures to minimize 
impacts consistent with City policies and requirements and a statement of overriding 
considerations for any impact that may not be reduced to a less than significant level. 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN 
JOSE: 
1.  That the above recitals are true and correct; and 
2.  That the City Council does hereby find and certify that the FEIR has been prepared 
and completed in compliance with CEQA; and 
3.  The  City  Council  was  presented  with,  and  has  independently  reviewed  and 
analyzed the FEIR and other information in the record and has considered the 
information contained therein, including the written and oral comments received at 
the public hearings on the FEIR and the Project, prior to acting upon or approving 
the Project, and has found that the FEIR represents the independent judgement of 
the City of San José (“City”) as lead agency for the Project, and designated the 
Director of Planning, Building, and Code Enforcement at the Director’s Office at 
200 East Santa Clara Street, 3rd Floor Tower, San José, California 95113, as the 
custodian of documents and record of proceedings on which the decision of the 
City is based; and 
 
  2 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
4.  That the City Council does hereby find and recognize that the FEIR contains 
additions, clarifications, modifications, and other information in its response to 
comments on the Draft EIR or obtained by the City after the Draft EIR was issued 
and circulated for public review and does hereby find that such changes and 
additional  information  are  not  significant  new  information  as  that  phrase  is 
described under CEQA because such changes and additional information do not 
indicate that any of the following would result from approval and implementation of 
the Project: (i) any new significant environmental impact or substantially more 
severe environmental impact not already disclosed and evaluated in the Draft EIR, 
(ii) any feasible mitigation measure considerably different from those analyzed in 
the Draft EIR that would lessen a significant environmental impact of the Project 
has been proposed and would not be implemented, or (iii) any feasible alternative 
considerably different from those analyzed in the Draft EIR that would lessen a 
significant environmental impact of the Project has been proposed and would not 
be implemented; and 
5.  That the City Council does hereby find and determine that recirculation of the FEIR 
for further public review and comment is not warranted or required under the 
provisions of CEQA; and 
6.  That the City Council does hereby make the following findings with respect to the 
significant effects of the environment of the Project, as identified in the FEIR with 
the understanding that all of the information in this Resolution is intended as a 
summary  of  the  full  administrative  record  supporting  the  FEIR;  which  full 
administrative record should be consulted for the full details supporting these 
findings.  
 
WEST SAN CARLOS MIXED-USE PROJECT 
SIGNIFICANT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS 
 
Air Quality 
Impact:  AQ-1.1: Construction activities associated with the proposed project would 
expose the maximally exposed individuals near the project site to cancer 
risk and PM10 exhaust in excess of BAAQMD single-source thresholds of 
greater than 10.0 per million and greater than 0.3 μg/m3, respectively (108.6 
per million increased cancer lifetime risk and 0.87 μg/m3, respectively) 
without mitigation. 
 
Impact:   AQ(C)-1: The maximum cancer risk and annual PM10 concentration would 
exceed the BAAQMD threshold for cumulative sources for cancer lifetime 
 
  3 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
risk (more than 100 per million) and PM  exhaust (more than 0.8) without 
10
mitigation 
 
Mitigation:  MM  AQ-1.1:  Prior  to  the  issuance  of  any  demolition,  grading,  and/or 
buildings permits (whichever occurs first), the project applicant shall submit 
a construction operations plan that includes specifications of the equipment 
to be used during construction to the Director of Planning, Building and 
Code  Enforcement  or  the  Director’s  designee.  The  plan  shall  be 
accompanied by a letter signed by an air quality specialist, verifying that the 
equipment included in the plan meets a fleet-wide average of 93 percent 
reduction in diesel particulate matter (DPM). Feasible methods to achieve 
this reduction would include the following: 
1.  All  diesel-powered  off-road  equipment,  larger  than  25  horsepower, 
operating on the site for more than two days continuously shall, at a 
minimum, meet U.S. EPA particulate matter emissions standards for 
Tier 4 interim engines or equivalent. 
2.  Provide electric power to avoid use of diesel-powered generator sets 
and other portable equipment. 
3.  Alternatively, equipment that meets U.S. EPA Tier 3 engines standards 
for  particulate  matter  that  include  CARB-certified  Level  3  Diesel 
Particulate Filters or use of equipment that is electrically powered or 
uses non-diesel fuels would meet this requirement. 
 
Finding:  With implementation of Mitigation Measure AQ-1.1, PM10 and cancer risk 
exposure to nearby sensitive receptors associated with the construction of 
the Project would be reduced to less than significant levels. Additionally, the 
Implementation of Mitigation Measure AQ-1.1 would reduce the Project’s 
impact to the cumulative exposure of nearby sensitive receptors to toxic air 
contaminants to a less than-significant level. (Less than Significant with 
Mitigation Incorporated)  
 
 
Facts in Support of the Finding: As discussed in Section 3.3 of the DEIR and the Air 
Quality Analysis (Appendix B of the DEIR), implementation of Mitigation 
Measure AQ-1.1, would reduce the maximum increased lifetime cancer 
risks (assuming infant exposure) and maximum increased annual PM  
2.5
emission associated with the Project construction activities to the off-site 
Maximally Exposed Individual (MEI) to 3.6 per million and 0.13 μg/m3, below 
the BAAQMD single-source thresholds of 10.0 per million and 0.3 μg/m3, 
respectively.  Implementation  of  Mitigation  Measure  AQ-1.1  would  also 
reduce the maximum increased cumulative lifetime cancer risks and annual 
 
  4 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
PM  concentration impacts to a less than significant level, from 131.8 per 
10
million to 26.8 per million and 1.4 to 0.66 μg/m3 which are below the 
BAAQMD cumulative thresholds of more than 100 per million and more than 
0.8 μg/m3, respectively.  
 
Biological Resources 
Impact:  Impact  BIO-1:  Project  construction  could  impact  nesting  birds  on  or 
adjacent to the site, if present. 
 
Mitigation:  MM BIO-1.1: Avoidance: The project applicant shall schedule demolition 
and construction activities to avoid the nesting season. The nesting season 
for most birds, including most raptors in the San Francisco Bay area, 
extends from February 1st through August 30th (inclusive). 
 
MM BIO-1.2: Nesting Bird Surveys: Demolition and construction cannot be 
scheduled to occur between September 1 and January 31st (Inclusive), pre-
construction surveys for nesting birds shall be completed by a qualified 
ornithologist  to  ensure  that  no  nests  shall  be  disturbed  during  project 
implementation. This survey shall be completed no more than 14 days prior 
to the initiation of construction activities during the early part of the breeding 
season (February 1st through April 30th inclusive) and no more than 30 days 
prior to the initiation of these activities during the late part of the breeding 
season (May 1st through August 30th inclusive). During this survey, the 
ornithologist  shall  inspect  all  trees  and  other  possible  nesting  habitats 
immediately adjacent to the construction areas for nests.  
 
MM BIO-1.3: Buffer Zones: If an active nest is found sufficiently close to 
work areas to be disturbed by construction, the ornithologist, in consultation 
with the California Department of Fish and Wildlife, shall determine the 
extent of a construction free buffer zone to be established around the nest, 
typically 250 feet, to ensure that raptor or migratory bird nests shall not be 
disturbed during project construction. 
 
MM BIO-1.4: Reporting: Prior to any tree removal, or approval of any 
grading permits (whichever occurs first), the ornithologist shall submit a 
report indicating the results of the survey and any designated buffer zones 
to the satisfaction of the City’s Director of Planning, Building and Code 
Enforcement or the Director’s designee.  
 
Finding:  Implementation of Mitigation Measures BIO-1.1 through BIO-1.4 would 
reduce potential impacts to nesting migratory birds to a less than 
significant level. (Less than Significant with Mitigation Incorporated) 
 
  5 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
 
Facts in Support of the Finding: As discussed in Section 3.4, Biological Resources of 
the Draft EIR, construction disturbance and project tree removal during 
avian breeding season could result in the incidental loss of eggs or nestlings 
either directly. Scheduling construction and tree removal/pruning activities 
outside of the nesting season would avoid disturbance to nesting birds. If 
construction activities cannot be scheduled to occur outside of the nesting 
season,  conducting  pre-construction  surveys  and  implementing  a 
construction-free buffer zone around any migratory bird nests will ensure 
that  raptor  and  migratory  bird  nests  are  not  disturbed  during  project 
construction, under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act and California Fish and 
Game Code. The size of the buffer zones will be determined by consultation 
between the qualified ornithologist and the CDFW and based on scientific 
evidence  and  best  management  practices.  Compliance  with  Mitigation 
Measures BIO-1.1-1.4 would avoid impacts to nesting birds. 
 
 
Cultural Resources 
Impact:  CUL-1:  Implementation  of  the  proposed  project  would  result  in  the 
demolition of the Craftsman-style house and the seven Spanish Revival- 
style  bungalows  on-site  that  are  eligible  City  Landmarks,  a  significant 
impact.  
 
CUL(C)-1:  Implementation  of  the  proposed  project  would  result  in  a 
cumulatively considerable contribution to a significant cultural resources 
impact to the remaining Craftsman-style houses and bungalow courts in the 
City. 
 
Mitigation:  MM CUL-1.1: The project applicant shall implement the following measures 
prior to any demolition permits for the Craftsman-style house and seven 
Spanish Revival-style bungalow units on-site.  
 
Documentation: The structures shall be documented in accordance with the 
guidelines established for the Historic American Building Survey (HABS) 
and shall consist of the following components:  
 
1.  Drawings – Prepare sketch floor plans.  
2.  Photographs  –  Digital  photographic  documentation  of  the  interior, 
exterior, and setting of the buildings in compliance with the National 
Register Photo Policy Fact Sheet. Photos must have a permanency 
rating of approximately 75 years.  
 
  6 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
3.  Written Data – HABS written documentation in short form.  
This documentation shall be prepared by a professional historic resources 
consultant who meets the Secretary of Interior’s Professional Qualifications 
Standards. The report shall be deposited with History San José and a copy 
provided to the City’s Planning Division as well as filed with the Northwest 
Information Center, Sonoma State University. 
 
Relocation by a Third Party: The structures shall be advertised for relocation 
by a third party. The project applicant shall advertise the availability of the 
structure for a period of no less than 30 days. The advertisements must 
include a newspaper of general circulation, a website, and notice on the 
project site and must be reviewed by the City’s Historic Preservation Officer 
or  Environmental  Review  Supervising  Planner  prior  to  circulation.  The 
project applicant shall provide evidence to City staff that this condition has 
been met prior to the issuance of any demolition permits.  
 
If a third party does agree to relocate one or more of the structures the 
following measures must be followed: 
 
1.  The City’s Director of Planning, Building and Code Enforcement, based 
on  consultation  with  the  City’s  Historic  Preservation  Officer,  must 
determine that the receiver site(s) are suitable for the building(s). 
2.  Prior to relocation, a historic preservation architect and a structural 
engineer shall undertake an existing condition study. The purpose of the 
study shall be to establish the baseline condition of the buildings prior to 
relocation. The documentation shall take the form of written descriptions 
and  visual  illustrations,  including  those  character-defining  physical 
features of the resource that convey its historic significance and must be 
protected and preserved. The documentation shall be reviewed and 
approved by the City of San José prior to the structures being moved. 
Documentation already completed will be used to the extent possible to 
avoid repetition in work. 
3.  To protect the buildings during relocation, the third party shall engage a 
building mover who has experience moving similar historic structures. A 
structural engineer will also be engaged to determine if the buildings 
need to be reinforced/stabilized before the move. 
4.  The project applicant shall offer financial assistance for the relocation 
that is equal to a reasonable cost of demolition of the structure(s). 
5.  Once moved, the building shall be repaired and restored, as needed, in 
conformance  with  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior’s  Standards  for  the 
 
  7 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
Treatment of Historic Properties. In particular, the character-defining 
features shall be restored in a manner that preserves the integrity of the 
features for the long-term preservation of these features.  
 
Upon completion of the repairs, a qualified architectural historian shall 
document and confirm that renovations of the structure(s) were completed 
in  conformance  with  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior’s  Standards  for  the 
Treatment of Historic Properties and that all character-defining features 
were preserved and submit a memo report to the Director of Planning, 
Building and Code Enforcement or Director’s designee.  
 
Salvage: If no third party relocates the structure(s), the structure(s) shall be 
made available for salvage to salvage companies facilitating the reuse of 
historic building materials. The time frame available for salvage shall be 
established by the City of San José Department of Planning, Building and 
Code Enforcement. The project applicant must provide evidence to the 
Director  of  Planning,  Building,  and  Code  Enforcement  or  Director’s 
designee that this condition has been met prior to the issuance of demolition 
permits.  
 
Finding:    Even with implementation of the identified mitigation measures; demolition 
or salvage of the Craftsman-style single-family residence and the seven 
bungalow units at 1530 West San Carlos Street would remain a significant 
unavoidable impact because the residences would be permanently lost. 
Relocation of the structures, while preserving the structures in a different 
location,  would  result  in  a  loss  of  connection  to  its  current  location. 
Specifically, the structures would no longer be recognized as a residence 
associated with the City’s agricultural past and early 20th century residential 
development of West San Carlos Street, which post-war development has 
replaced.   (Significant and Unavoidable Impact) 
 
Facts in Support of the Finding:  The residences at 1530 West San Carlos Street, 
including  the  Craftsman-style  single-family  residence  and  the  seven 
identical bungalows, as discussed in Section 3.5 of the DEIR, have been 
determined to be candidate City Landmarks per the Historic Resources 
Evaluation prepared by Treanor HL on April 10, 2019 and updated July 29, 
2019, because they meet the local eligibility criteria as defined in Section 
13.48.110.H of the San José Municipal Code, having significance for its 
character, interest or value as part of the local, regional state or national 
history, heritage or culture; embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of 
an architectural type or specimen; and its embodiment of elements of 
architectural or engineering design, detail, materials or craftsmanship which 
 
  8 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
represents a significant architectural innovation or which is unique. The 
Secretary  of  Interior’s  (SOI’s)  standards  for  the  Treatment  of  Historic 
Properties includes four treatments: preservation, rehabilitation, restoration 
and  reconstruction.  Preservation  refers  to  maintain  the  existing  form, 
integrity  and  materials  of  a  historic  property.  Rehabilitation  allows  for 
compatible use for a property through repair, alterations, and additions while 
preserving  its  historical  features.  Restoration  is  the  act  of  accurately 
depicting  a  property  as  it  appeared  at  a  particular  period  of  time. 
Reconstruction refers to constructing a new building for the purpose of 
replicating a historic building’s appearance as a specific period of time. The 
project proposes to demolish all eight residential structures on-site which 
are  candidate  City  Landmark  structures  without  preserving,  restoring, 
rehabilitating, or reconstructing any portions of the historic buildings. While 
Mitigation  Measure  CUL-1.1  would  help  to  retain  the  memory  of  the 
buildings  and  their  association  with  the  City’s  history,  the  loss  of  the 
buildings  and  their  association  with  the  project  site  would  remain  a 
significant and unavoidable impact. 
 
 
Hazards and Hazardous Materials 
 
Impact:  Impact HAZ-1: Construction activities associated with the proposed project 
could  expose  construction  workers  and  nearby  land  uses  related  to 
hazardous  materials  associated  with  the  previous  auto  shop  and 
agricultural uses during earthwork activities.  
 
Mitigation:  MM  HAZ-1.1:  Prior  to  the  commencement  of  earthwork  activities,  the 
project  applicant  shall  hire  a  qualified  professional  to  develop  a  Site 
Management Plan that includes:  
1.  Stockpile  management  including  dust  control,  sampling,  stormwater 
pollution prevention and the installation of BMPs; 
2.  Proper disposal procedures of contaminated materials; 
3.  Monitoring, reporting, and regulatory oversight notifications; 
4.  A health and safety plan for each contractor working at the site that 
addresses  the  safety  and  health  hazards  of  each  phase  of  site 
operations  with  the  requirements  and  procedures  for  employee 
protection; and 
5.  The  health  and  safety  plan  will  also  outline  proper  soil/  and  or 
groundwater handling procedures and health and safety requirements 
 
  9 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
to minimize worker and public exposure to contaminated soil/and or 
groundwater during construction. 
 
The Site Management Plan shall be submitted to the Director of Planning, 
Building  and  Code  Enforcement  or  Director’s  designee  and  the  City’s 
Municipal  Environmental  Compliance  Officer  of  the  Department  of 
Environmental Services.  
 
If any contamination is encountered above appropriate regulatory screening 
levels, then the applicant will notify the Santa Clara County Department of 
Environmental Health and enter into the County Site Cleanup Program. 
Removal of USTs and additional sampling/analysis will be completed under 
County Oversight. Evidence of County oversight shall be provided to the 
Director  of  Planning, Building  and  Code Enforcement or  the  Director’s 
designee and the Municipal Environmental Compliance Officer. 
 
Finding:  Implementation of Mitigation Measure HAZ-1.1 would reduce exposure of 
construction workers and nearby residences from contaminated on-site soil 
to  less  than  significant  levels.  (Less  than  Significant  Impact  with 
Mitigation Incorporated) 
 
Facts in Support of the Finding:  According to the analysis in Section 3.9 Hazards and 
Hazardous Materials of the DEIR, the western portion of the site has been 
used for auto commercial uses since the 1950s and contained a former 
underground storage tank (UST). During the Phase II investigation, signs or 
presence of the former UST were not identified. In addition, soil sampling 
was completed to evaluate the potential of carbon chain total petroleum 
hydrocarbons  (TPH-cc),  and/or  volatile  organic  compounds  (VOCs)  to 
contaminate on-site soils. Sampling results show that levels of TPH-cc and 
VOCs were below the applicable environmental screening levels (ESLs). 
Refer  to  Appendix  F  for  additional  details  about  sampling  locations, 
methods, and results. While presence of the UST was not discovered, 
Mitigation Measure HAZ-1.1 would be implemented in the event the UST or 
residual  contamination  from  the  UST  are  discovered  during  project 
earthwork  activities.   Preparation  of a  Site  Management  Plan  for  best 
management  practices  and  health  and  safety  plan  to  educate  on-site 
workers, and potential testing to find out the extent of contaminated soil 
would ensure that impacts from contaminated soil being released into the 
environment during construction would be less than significant.  
 
 
Noise 
 
  10 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
 
Impact:  Impact  NOI-1:  Project  construction  would  generate  vibration  levels 
reaching up to 1.2 in/sec PPV (within five feet south from project site), in 
exceedance  of  0.2  in/sec  PPV  at  buildings  of  normal  conventional 
construction located within 30 feet of the project site. 
 
Mitigation:  MM NOI-1.1: Equipment Selection. Prior to issuance of any demolition or 
grading permits, the project applicant shall implement the following controls 
to reduce vibration impacts from construction activities: 
1.  Prohibit  impact  or  vibratory  pile  driving.  Drilled  piles  or  mat  slab 
foundations cause lower vibration levels where geological conditions 
permit their use. 
2.  A list of all heavy construction equipment to be used for this project 
known  to  produce  high  vibration  levels  (tracked  vehicles,  vibratory 
compaction, jackhammers, hoe rams, etc.) shall be submitted to the City 
by the contractor. This list shall be used to identify equipment and 
activities that would potentially generate substantial vibration and to 
define the level of effort required for continuous vibration monitoring. 
3.  Place operating equipment on the construction site at least 30 feet from 
vibration-sensitive receptors. 
4.  Use the smallest equipment available to complete the task and minimize 
vibration levels as low as feasible. 
5.  Avoid using vibratory rollers and tampers near sensitive areas. 
6.  Select demolition methods not involving impact tools. 
7.  Modify/design or identify alternative construction methods to reduce 
vibration levels below the limits. 
8.  Avoid dropping heavy objects or materials. 
 
MM NOI-1.2:  Vibration monitoring plan. Prior to issuance of demolition or 
grading  permits,  the  project  applicant  shall  implement  a  construction 
vibration monitoring plan to document condition of conventional properties 
within  30  feet  of  the  project  site  prior  to,  during,  and  after  vibration 
generating construction activities. All plan tasks shall be undertaken under 
the direction of a licensed Professional Structural Engineer in the State of 
California and be in accordance with industry accepted standard methods. 
The construction vibration monitoring plan shall be implemented to include 
the following tasks: 
1.  Identification of sensitivity to ground-borne vibration of the property. A 
vibration survey (generally described below) shall be performed. 
 
  11 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
2.  Performance of a photo survey, elevation survey, and crack monitoring 
survey for the structures within 30 feet of the site. Surveys shall be 
performed prior to, in regular intervals during, and after completion of 
vibration generating construction activities and shall include internal and 
external crack monitoring in the structure, settlement, and distress and 
shall document the condition of the foundation, walls and other structural 
elements in the interior and exterior of said structure. 
3.  Development of a vibration monitoring and construction contingency 
plan to identify where monitoring shall be conducted, set up a vibration 
monitoring  schedule,  define  structure-specific  vibration  limits,  and 
address the need to conduct photo, elevation, and crack surveys to 
document before and after construction. Construction contingencies, 
such as alternative construction methods and equipment, or securing 
the structure, shall be identified for when vibration levels approach the 
limits. 
4.  If vibration levels approach limits, suspend construction and implement 
contingencies to either lower vibration levels or secure the affected 
structure. 
5.  Complete a post-survey on the structure where either monitoring has 
indicated high levels or complaints of damage. Make appropriate repairs 
in  accordance  with the  Secretary  of  the  Interior’s  Standards  where 
damage has occurred as a result of construction activities. 
6.  The  results  of  all  vibration  monitoring  shall  be  summarized  and 
submitted in a report shortly after substantial completion of each phase 
identified in the project schedule. The report will include a description of 
measurement methods, equipment used, calibration certificates, and 
graphics as required to clearly identify vibration-monitoring locations. An 
explanation of all events that exceeded vibration limits will be included 
together with proper documentation supporting any such claims. 
7.  Designate a person responsible for registering and investigating claims 
of excessive vibration. The contact information of such person shall be 
clearly posted on the construction site. 
 
Finding:        With  implementation  of  Mitigation  Measures  NOI-1.1  and  NOI-1.2  and 
standard permit conditions, vibration generated during the project’s 48-
month construction period would have less than significant impacts on the 
adjacent  buildings  (Less  than  Significant  Impact  with  Mitigation 
Incorporated) 
 
 
  12 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
Facts in Support of the Finding: As discussed in Section 3.13 of the Draft EIR and 
supporting  Noise  and  Vibration  Assessment  prepared  for  the  Project 
(Appendix G of the DEIR), the project would be constructed over a 48-month 
construction  period  divided  into  two  phases.  Identifying  the  sensitive 
buildings adjacent to the project and monitoring vibration activities would 
ensure  that  activities  involving  vibrating  equipment  would  not  cause 
damage to adjacent structures within 30 feet of the project site and that any 
damaged  caused  would  be  repaired.  Using  equipment  with  a  lower 
threshold for vibration impacts would also assist in ensuring that no damage 
would occur from construction activities using vibrating equipment.  
 
 
 
FINDINGS CONCERNING ALTERNATIVES 
 
In order to comply with the purposes of CEQA, it is important to identify alternatives that 
reduce the significant impacts that are anticipated to occur if the project is implemented 
and to try to meet as many of the project’s objectives as possible.  The CEQA Guidelines 
emphasize a common sense approach -- the alternatives should be reasonable, should 
“foster  informed  decision  making  and  public  participation,”  and  should  focus  on 
alternatives that avoid or substantially lessen the significant impacts.   
 
The alternatives analyzed in the DEIR were developed with the goal of being at least 
potentially  feasible,  given  Project  objectives  and  site  constraints,  while  avoiding  or 
reducing the Project’s identified environmental effects.  The following are evaluated as 
alternatives to the proposed Project: 
 
1)  No Project – No Development Alternative 
2)  No Project – Existing Land Use Designation Alternative 
3)  Design Alternative – Relocate and restore five bungalows (historic resources) 
 
1.  No Project – No Development Alternative 
A.  Description of Alternative: The No Project – No Development Alternative would 
retain  the  existing  land  uses  on-site  as  is,  which  includes  the  existing  auto 
commercial, commercial (restaurant), and martial arts studio (commercial), and 
eight residential structures on-site.   
B.  Comparison  of  Environmental  Impacts:  Under  the  No  Project  –  No 
Development Alternative, none of the impacts of the project would occur including 
the significant and unavoidable impact to cultural resources.   
 
  13 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
C.  Finding: This alternative would not meet any of the project objectives because the 
No Project – No Development Alternative would not result in any new development 
on the site. Specifically, this alternative would not allow for the density encouraged 
under  the  General  Plan  designation  and  zoning.  Therefore,  because  this 
alternative would not meet any of the project objectives, this alternative is rejected. 
 
2.  No Project – Existing Land Use Designation Alternative 
 
A.  Description of Alternative: The No Project – Existing Land Use Designation  
Alternative is essentially the same as the proposed project. This alternative was 
proposed  when  the  project  still  included  a  Planned  Development  Rezoning 
application to rezone the site from the existing CP Commercial Pedestrian Zoning 
District and the R-M Multiple Residence Zoning District to a Planned Development 
Zoning District. This alternative maintained the existing zoning districts and would 
have constructed a similar project consistent with the General Plan designation 
and zoning districts. The originally proposed Planned Development Rezoning 
would  have  afforded  the  project  more  flexibility  in  terms  of  site  design  and 
setbacks. Under Assembly Bill 3194, the Housing Accountability Act Amendment, 
effective January 1, 2019, the local governments’ authority is limited and cannot 
reject  or  restrict  housing  development  projects  that  comply  with  applicable 
objective general plan, zoning, and subdivision standards. Therefore, the Planned 
Development rezoning application is no longer required for the project rendering 
this alternative essentially the same as the analyzed project.  
B.  Comparison of Environmental Impacts: Under this alternative, the project would 
remain the same and result in the same impacts.  
C.  Finding: Because rezoning is no longer required, there is no land use designation 
alternative. Importantly, alternatives are alternatives that would feasibly attain most 
of the basic objectives of the project but would avoid or substantially lessen any of 
the significant impacts of the project. Because this alternative does not reduce any 
impacts,  it  is  not  a  reasonable  or  feasible  alternative.  Therefore,  this  non-
alternative is rejected.  
 
3. Design Alternative – Relocate and Restore Five of the Seven Historic 
Bungalows 
A.  Description of Alternative: The Design Alternative – Replace and Restore Five 
of the Seven Historic Bungalows would lessen the project’s impact on the historic 
resources by relocating and restoring five of the seven historic Spanish Revival-
style bungalows on the site. This alternative would require the project to be 
 
  14 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
redesigned in a manner that would preserve the historic resources to the extent 
feasible while still allowing a physically feasible development on the project site. 
The proposed Building 1 of the Project would be redesigned with a reduced 
building footprint to allow five of the historic bungalow units to be relocated and 
preserved on the southern portion of the site. The proposed Building 2 would 
remain the same as the proposed project. The five bungalow units would be 
situated in a horseshoe layout and facing each other to form a central court in the 
middle, recreating a similar court-like court as the existing unit layout. Building 1, 
under this alternative, would have 24 fewer residential units, 11,165 square feet 
less of commercial space, and 18,923 square feet less common space. Building 1 
would include 79 residential units, 10,000 square feet of commercial space, and 
6,000 square feet of common space, which combined with Building 2 would result 
in a density of 111 du/ac and 0.29 commercial floor-area ratio (FAR). Additionally, 
Building 1 would be set back at least 95 feet from the southern property line. 
Building  stories  and  height  would  remain  the  same.  Access  to  the  site  and 
bungalow units would be provided on the proposed driveway on West San Carlos 
Street. This design alternative would preserve five of the seven bungalow units 
and would reduce the significant impact to the historic resources but not to a less 
than significant level. by restoring the buildings consistent with the City’s and 
Secretary of the Interior’s requirements for historic buildings. All other impacts 
during construction and operation would be similar to that of the proposed project.  
B.  Comparison of Environmental Impacts: Under this alternative, five of the seven 
bungalows would be relocated and preserved. Therefore, not all of the historic 
resources (eligible City Landmarks) would be preserved. The design alternative 
would lessen the significant impact to the historic resources; however, all other 
impacts during construction and operation would be similar to that of the proposed 
project.  
C.  Finding: Under the Design Alternative, only some of the project objectives would 
be met or partially met. For instance, Objective 1 which is consistent with the goals 
of  the  West  San  Carlos  Urban  Village  Plan  would  not  be  met  because  the 
commercial FAR would not meet the minimum 0.3 requirement of the Plan. This 
alternative would not meet Objectives 5 and 7 or conform with the conceptual 
paseo envisioned in Figure 2.2-5 of the West San Carlos Urban Village Plan 
because it would relocate the bungalow units to the southern portion of the site 
where the paseo is proposed for the project and Urban Village.  This Design 
Alternative would meet Objective 2 to provide a minimum density of 111 du/ac. 
The site currently contains approximately 7,600 square feet of commercial uses. 
The Design Alternative would meet Objective 3 because it would include more 
commercial space for tax revenue compared to existing conditions. The Design 
Alternative would also meet Objective 4 because it would be required to replace 
the  existing  sidewalk  on  the  project  frontages  consistent  with  the  City 
 
  15 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
requirements, and it would include commercial/retail uses on the West San Carlos 
Street project frontage. The Design Alternative would meet Objective 6 because it 
would  continue  to  be  subject  to  the  West  San  Carlos  Urban  Village  Design 
Guidelines.  This alternative would relocate, preserve, and restore five of the 
historic bungalows on-site. While the preservation would reduce the severity of the 
historic resources lost, the alternative would continue to impact historic resources 
as the single-family home and two other bungalows would be demolished. In 
consideration of the potential for preservation, the objectives this project would 
meet, and the balancing of this alternative against the proposed project and City’s 
need  for  dense,  mixed-use  residential/commercial  projects,  this  alternative  is 
rejected. 
 
Environmentally Superior Project 
The No Project – No Development Alternative would avoid all project impacts, including 
the significant and unavoidable impact to potential historic resources of significance to 
the City of San José. However, per Section 15126.6(e)(2) of the CEQA Guidelines, when 
the no-project alternative is the environmentally superior alternative, another alternative 
shall be identified as the environmentally superior alternative. The Design Alternative – 
Relocation and Preservation of five bungalows would meet most of the project objectives 
and avoid the significant and unavoidable impact of the project. This alternative would 
lessen the significant impacts to the historic resources and support a dense mixed-use 
project near transit which aligns with the City’s Envision San José 2040 General Plan and 
Urban Village goals. Therefore, this alternative is the environmentally superior alternative. 
 
 
MITIGATION MONITORING AND REPORTING PROGRAM 
 
Attached to this Resolution as Exhibit “A” and incorporated and adopted as part of this 
Resolution herein is the Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program (“MMRP”) for the 
Project required under Section 21081.6 of the CEQA Statute and Section 15097(b) of the 
CEQA Guidelines. The MMRP identifies impacts of the Project, corresponding mitigation, 
designation of responsibility for mitigation implementation and the agency responsible for 
the monitoring action. 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OVERRIDING CONSIDERATIONS 
Pursuant to the provisions of CEQA, the City Council of the City of San José hereby 
adopts and makes the following statement of overriding considerations regarding the 
significant and unavoidable impact of the Project as outlined above and the anticipated 
economic, social, and other benefits of the Project. 
 
  16 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
 
A.  Significant Unavoidable Impacts.  With respect to the foregoing findings and in 
recognition of those facts which are included in the record, the City has determined 
the Project has significant unavoidable impacts, as set forth above, associated with 
demolition of eight candidate City Landmark structures. 
B.  Overriding Considerations.  The City Council specifically adopts and makes this 
Statement  of  Overriding  Considerations  that  this  Project  has  eliminated  or 
substantially lessened all significant effects on the environment where feasible, 
and  finds  that  the  remaining  significant  unavoidable  impact  of  the  Project  is 
acceptable  in  light  of  the  economic  and  social  considerations  noted  below, 
because the benefits of the Project outweigh the significant unavoidable impact of 
the Project.  The City Council finds that the overriding considerations set forth 
below constitutes a separate and independent ground for finding that the benefits 
of the Project outweigh its significant unavoidable environmental impact and is an 
overriding consideration warranting approval of the Project.  These matters are 
supported by evidence in the record that includes, but is not limited to, the Envision 
San José 2040 General Plan and to development in the West San Carlos Urban 
Village. 
C.  Benefits of the Proposed Project.  While the City recognizes that there is historic 
value  in  retaining  the  Craftsman-style  single-family  residence  and  the  seven 
Spanish Revival-style bungalows as City Landmarks associated with the City’s 
agricultural past and the advent of the automobile prior to World War II, the City 
has designated growth areas such as the West San Carlos Urban Village for the 
development of dense, mixed-use, multi-modal projects.   The City Council has 
considered the public record of proceedings on the proposed Project and other 
written materials presented to the City as well as oral and written testimony at all 
public  hearings  related  to  the  Project,  and  does  hereby  determine  that 
implementation of the Project as specifically provided in the Project documents 
would result in the following substantial public benefits. 
1)  Provision of a Mixed-Use Project in an Identified Growth Area. Consistent 
with Major Strategy #3 (Focused Growth) of the General Plan, this project 
would provide 173 dwelling units and 17,836 square feet of commercial space 
within two seven-story buildings, sited within a transit priority area, primarily 
served by VTA Bus Routes 23 and 523 (considered major transit stops because 
the routes have headways of 15 minutes during the AM and PM peak commute 
periods, and is in close proximity to Downtown.  The project would support job 
growth by providing neighborhood-supportive retail spaces along West San 
Carlos Street and provide new housing units to meet the City’s increasing 
housing demand.  
 
  17 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
2)  Provision of a Paseo. In addition to the residential/commercial mixed uses, 
the project would include a 30-foot walkway that wraps around the building and 
connects to the proposed driveway and the sidewalk on West San Carlos Street 
to the proposed (private) paseo which is part of the project and envisioned for 
the West San Carlos Urban Village.   
3)  Development in Transit Rich Area and along a Grand Boulevard. The 
project site is located along West San Carlos Street - a Grand Boulevard that 
is served by several bus lines. The project site is also within 1.5 miles from the 
Diridon Transit Depot, a station served by ACE, Caltrain, Greyhound, Amtrak, 
VTA bus lines, and the future BART line.   
4)  Complete Communities.  The proposed development also includes 12,818 
square feet of outdoor common open space and 9,412 square feet of indoor 
amenity space in the proposed buildings, and a 4,450-square foot private 
paseo. The development will also provide on-site parking for vehicles and 
bicycles, both for the residential component and the retail component of the 
project. The project will advance the Envision San José 2040 General Plan 
policies to create a complete community with a mixed-use building with an 
amenity-rich  residential  use  and new  commercial/retail  uses  placed  within 
walking distance of neighborhoods and the commercial businesses along West 
San  Carlos  Street.  Placing  complementary  land  uses  like  residential  and 
commercial/retail  uses  near  each  other  will  reduce  the  number  of  single-
occupancy automobile trips and vehicle miles traveled compared with the 
equivalent amount of development in a more suburban location where uses are 
separated. Less trips would contribute to a decrease in project-generated 
greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Based on the above, the project would meet the strategies and goals of the Envision San 
José 2040 General Plan and Urban Village criteria of locating high density development 
on infill sites near transit corridors, activating West San Carlos Street by providing ground 
floor retail, and promoting bicycling by providing bicycle parking.  
 
The City Council has weighed each of the above benefits of the proposed Project against 
its significant unavoidable impact identified in the EIR, and hereby determines that these 
benefits outweigh the adverse environmental effect of the Project and, therefore, further 
determines that the adverse environmental effect is acceptable and overridden. 
 
 
LOCATION AND CUSTODIAN OF RECORDS 
 
The documents and other materials that constitute the record of proceedings on which 
the City Council based the foregoing findings and approval of the Project are located at 
 
  18 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/29/2021 
 
 
the Department of Planning, Building and Code Enforcement, 200 East Santa Clara 
Street, Third Floor Tower, San José, CA 95113. 
 
 
ADOPTED this            day of           ,           , by the following vote: 
 
 
  AYES:             
 
 
  NOES:             
 
 
  ABSENT:             
 
 
  DISQUALIFIED:             
 
 
     
 
  SAM LICCARDO 
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
 
           
 
TONI J. TABER, CMC 
City Clerk 
 
 
  19 
T-41008.001/1834966 
Council Agenda: _____ 
Item No.: ______ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408)535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for final 
document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
RESOLUTION NO.____  
A RESOLUTION OF THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN 
JOSE  APPROVING,  SUBJECT  TO  CONDITIONS,  A 
SPECIAL USE PERMIT TO ALLOW THE DEMOLITION OF 
THREE COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS, EIGHT RESIDENTIAL 
BUILDINGS, ASSOCIATED SERVICE STRUCTURES, AND 
ONE BILLBOARD TOTALING 14,131 SQUARE FEET, THE 
REMOVAL OF 11 ORDINANCE AND 4 NON-ORDINANCE 
SIZE TREES, AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF TWO SEVEN-
STORY  RESIDENTIAL  MIXED-USE  BUILDINGS, 
INCLUDING  173  RESIDENTIAL  UNITS  AND  17,836 
SQUARE FEET OF COMMERCIAL RETAIL SPACE WITH 
AN  APPROXIMATELY  42  PERCENT  PARKING 
REDUCTION  ON  AN  APPROXIMATELY  1.34-GROSS 
ACRE SITE, LOCATED ON THE SOUTHEAST CORNER 
OF  WEST  SAN  CARLOS  STREET  AND  BUENA  VISTA 
AVENUE (1530-1544 WEST SAN CARLOS STREET (APN: 
277-18-018, 277-18-019, 277-18-020) 
 
FILE NO. SP20-004 
 
WHEREAS, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 20.100 of Title 20 of the San José 
Municipal Code, on April 29, 2019, an application for a Special Use Permit (File No. 
SP20-004) was filed by the applicant, Viji Mani, on behalf of Urban Villas, LLC, with the 
City of San José, for a Special  Use Permit to allow the demolition of three existing 
commercial buildings, eight residential buildings, associated service structures, and one 
billboard totaling 14,131 square feet, the removal of 11 ordinance-size  and four non 
ordinance-size trees, and to allow the construction of two seven-story residential mixed 
use buildings, including 173 residential units and 17,836 square feet of commercial retail 
space with an 42 percent parking reduction on an approximately 1.34-gross acre site, on 
that certain real property situated in the CP Commercial Pedestrian and R-M Multiple 
Residence Zoning Districts located on the southeast corner of West San Carlos Street 
and Buena Vista Avenue (1533-1544 West San Carlos Street, San José, which real 
property is sometimes referred to herein as the “subject property”); and 
 
 
  1 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
WHEREAS, the subject property is all that real property more particularly described in 
Exhibit "A" entitled “Legal Description,” which is attached hereto and made a part hereof 
by this reference as if fully set forth herein; and 
 
WHEREAS, pursuant to and in accordance with Chapter 20.100 of Title 20 of the San 
José Municipal Code, the Planning Commission conducted a Public Hearing on said 
application on July 14, 2021, notice of which was duly given; and 
 
WHEREAS, at said hearing, the Planning Commission gave all persons full opportunity 
to be heard and to present evidence and testimony respecting said matter; and 
 
WHEREAS, at said hearing, the Planning Commission made a recommendation to the 
City Council respecting said matter based on the evidence and testimony; and 
 
WHEREAS, pursuant to and in accordance with Chapter 20.100 of Title 20 of the San 
José Municipal Code, this City Council conducted a hearing on said application, notice of 
which was duly given; and 
 
WHEREAS, at said hearing this City Council gave all persons full opportunity to be heard 
and to present evidence and testimony respecting said matter; and 
 
WHEREAS, at said hearing this City Council received and considered the reports and 
recommendations  of  the  Planning  Commission  and  the  City’s  Director  of  Planning, 
Building and Code Enforcement; and  
 
WHEREAS, at said hearing, this City Council received in evidence a plan for the subject 
property entitled, “1530-1544 W. San Carlos St Mixed Use Development, SP20-004” 
dated received March 3rd, 2021, said plan is on file in the Department of Planning, 
Building and Code Enforcement and is available for inspection by anyone interested 
 
  2 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
herein, and said plan is incorporated herein by this reference, the same as if it were fully 
set forth herein; and 
 
WHEREAS, said public hearing before the City Council was conducted in all respects as 
required by the San José Municipal Code and the rules of this City Council; and 
 
WHEREAS, this City Council has heard and considered the testimony presented to it at 
the public hearing, and has further considered written materials submitted on behalf of 
the project applicant, City staff, and other interested parties; 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN 
JOSE THAT: 
After considering evidence presented at the public hearing, the City Council finds that the 
following are the relevant facts and findings regarding this proposed project: 
1.  Site Description and Surrounding Uses.  The subject 1.34-gross acre site is located 
on the southeast corner of West San Carlos Street and Buena Vista Avenue. The site 
is  currently  developed  with  three  existing  commercial  buildings,  eight  residential 
buildings that are candidate City Landmarks, associated service structures, and one 
billboard totaling approximately 14,131 square feet.  
The site is bordered by West San Carlos Street and multi-family housing to the north, 
a commercial retail building and multi-family housing to the east, single-family and 
multi-family residences to the south, and a restaurant (Jack in the Box) across Buena 
Vista Avenue to the west.  The project site is accessible from a right-in/right-out 26-
foot-wide driveway on West San Carlos Street. 
2.  Project Description.  The project consists of the demolition of all existing buildings 
on site, totaling 14,131 square feet and the removal of 15 trees (11 ordinance-size 
and four non-ordinance-size) to facilitate the construction of two seven-story mixed 
use buildings with one level of below-ground parking, including 173 residential units 
and 17,836 square feet of commercial retail space with an approximately 42 percent 
parking reduction on an approximately 1.34-gross acre site.   
The project would be constructed in two phases. Phase 1 would consist of the 
construction of a seven-story, approximately 173,925-square foot mixed use building 
located on the eastern end of the subject site. Phase 1 would include 103 residential 
units and approximately 11,387 square feet of ground floor commercial retail space. 
The construction of Phase 1 is expected to take approximately 24 months. Phase 2 
would consist of the construction of a seven-story, approximately 115,001-square foot 
 
  3 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
mixed use building located on the southeast corner of West San Carlos Street and 
Buena Vista Avenue. Phase 2 would include 70 residential units and approximately 
6,449 square feet of ground floor commercial retail space. The construction of Phase 
2 would also take approximately 24 months, for a total construction period of 48 
months between both phases. The maximum height of both buildings would be 92 
feet.  
Access to the project site would utilize the right-in/right-out 26-foot-wide driveway on 
West San Carlos Street. Vehicle and motorcycle parking would be provided in a 
ground floor garage as well as a subterranean garage below both buildings. A total of 
189 vehicle parking spaces would be provided, requiring an approximately 42 percent 
parking  reduction.  To  achieve  the  required  parking  reduction,  the  project  would 
implement a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) plan as outlined in the 
Municipal Code requirements below. The project would provide a total of 73 bicycle 
parking spaces and 49 motorcycle parking spaces.  
The project includes an approximately 30-foot-wide paseo located in the rear of the 
site. The paseo would include paved areas, landscaping, planters, trees, a play area, 
dog park, and low-level bollard lighting. The paseo is planned to be connected to the 
public right-of-way at Buena Vista Avenue.  
3.  State Law Assembly Bill 3194 (AB3194) 
The applicant originally submitted the project as a Planned Development Rezoning 
and a Planned Development Permit. However, the project was converted to a 
Special Use Permit because zoning consistency with the General Plan is not 
required for certain specified types of residential and mixed -se projects under State 
Law Assembly Bill 3194 (AB3194). AB3194, an amendment to the Housing 
Accountability Act Amendment, which became effective on January 1, 2019. Per AB 
3194, “mixed-use developments consisting of residential and nonresidential uses 
with at least two-thirds of the square footage designated for residential use can 
proceed if it complies with CEQA and “is consistent with the objective general plan 
standards and criteria.” (Government Code sections 65589.5(h)(2)(B) and 
65589.5(j)(4)). Therefore, staff analyzed the  
The total square footage of the project is approximately 288,520 square feet, of which 
approximately 17,836 square feet would consist of commercial space. Therefore, at 
least two-thirds of the square footage of the mixed-use project would be dedicated to 
residential space. The site has a General Plan Land Use Designation of Urban Village 
and is located in both the CP Commercial Pedestrian and R-M Multiple Residence 
Zoning  Districts.  The  project  was  reviewed  based  on  the  objective  criteria  and 
standards of the CP Commercial Pedestrian Zoning District, the conforming Zoning 
District of the Urban Village General Plan Land Use Designation. The project was 
determined to be complete on June 4th, 2019 
 
  4 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
4.  General Plan Conformance.  The subject site has an Envision San José 2040 
General Plan Land Use/Transportation Diagram land use designation of Urban Village. 
The Urban Village designation is applied within the Urban Village areas that are 
planned in the current Horizon (see Chapter 7 – Implementation for a description of 
Planning  Horizons  and  Urban  Village  Planning)  to  accommodate  higher  density 
housing growth along with a significant amount of job growth. This designation is also 
applied in some cases to specific sites within Urban Village Area Boundaries that have 
received entitlements for Urban Village type development. This designation supports 
a wide variety of commercial, residential, institutional or other land uses with an 
emphasis on establishing an attractive urban form in keeping with the Urban Village 
concept. Development within the Urban Village designation should conform to land use 
and design standards established with an adopted Urban Village Plan, which specifies 
how  each  Urban  Village  will  accommodate  the  planned  housing  and  job  growth 
capacity within the identified Urban Village Growth Area.  The project is consistent with 
the Urban Village Land Use Designation as it would provide a commercial service to 
families that live and work in the surrounding area.  
The project is consistent with the following General Plan Goals and Policies: 
•  Major Strategy #3 – Focus Growth: The Focused Growth Major Strategy plans for 
new residential and commercial growth capacity in specifically identified “Growth 
Areas” (Urban Villages, Specific Plan areas, Employment Areas, Downtown) while 
the majority of the City is not planned for additional growth or intensification. The 
strategy  focuses  new  growth  into  areas  of  San  José  that  will  enable  the 
achievement  of  economic  growth,  fiscal  sustainability,  and  environmental 
stewardship goals, while supporting the development of new, attractive urban 
neighborhoods. While the Focused Growth strategy directs and promotes growth 
within identified Growth Areas, it also strictly limits new residential development 
through  neighborhood  infill  outside  of  these  Growth  Areas  to  preserve  and 
enhance the quality of established neighborhoods, to reduce environmental and 
fiscal impacts, and to strengthen the City’s Urban Growth Boundary. 
•  Major Strategy #5: - Urban Village: The Urban Village Major Strategy promotes the 
development of Urban Villages to provide active, walkable, bicycle-friendly, transit-
oriented, mixed-use urban settings for new housing and job growth attractive to an 
innovative workforce and consistent with the Plan’s environmental goals. The 
General Plan establishes the Urban Villages concept to create a policy framework 
to direct most new job and housing growth to occur within walkable and bike 
friendly  Urban  Villages  that  have  good  access  to  transit  and  other  existing 
infrastructure and facilities. 
•  High  Quality  Facilities  and  Programs  Policy  PR-1.9:  As  Urban  Village  areas 
redevelop, incorporate urban open space and parkland recreation areas through 
a combination of high quality, publicly accessible outdoor spaces provided as part 
of new development projects; privately or, in limited instances, publicly owned and 
 
  5 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
maintained pocket parks; neighborhood parks where possible; as well as through 
access  to  trails  and  other  park  and  recreation  amenities.  Land  Use  and 
Employment Policy IE-1.3: As part of the intensification of commercial, Village, 
Industrial Park and Employment Center job Growth Areas, create complete, mixed-
employment  areas  that  include  business  support  uses,  public  and  private 
amenities,  child  care,  restaurants,  and  retail  goods  and  services  that  serve 
employees of these businesses and nearby businesses. 
•  Community  Design  Policy  CD-3.5:  Encourage  shared  and  alternative  parking 
arrangements and allow parking reductions when warranted by parking demand. 
•  Land Use Policy LU-9.1: Create a pedestrian-friendly environment by connecting 
new  residential  development  with  safe,  convenient,  accessible,  and  pleasant 
pedestrian facilities. Provide such connections between new development, its 
adjoining  neighborhood,  transit  access  points,  schools,  parks,  and  nearby 
commercial areas.  
Analysis: The redevelopment of the site is consistent with the General Plan Land Use 
Designation of Urban Village, as the project would provide a high-intensity mix of 
residential and commercial uses. The project would provide housing, retail options, 
and recreational opportunities in a central location, within a growth area, through the 
development  of  approximately  173  residential  units  and  17,836  square  feet  of 
commercial  retail  space.  Consistent  with  the  General  Plan  policies  for  the 
development of Urban Villages, the project would incorporate a paseo at the rear of 
the site, which would be connected to the public right-of-way in the future. The project 
would  include  public  improvements  including  the  construction  of  20-foot-wide 
sidewalks along West San Carlos Street and 12-foot-wide sidewalks along Buena 
Vista Avenue. The project also includes an approximately 42% parking reduction and 
the  implementation  of  a  TDM  plan.  The  TDM  plan  would  include  a package of 
measures to reduce vehicle trips and encourage transit ridership. TDM measures 
include providing an online kiosk of trip-planning resources, 100 percent unbundled 
parking for all residential spaces, Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) SmartPasses 
to all residential tenants, and on-site bicycle storage. The subject site is served by 
existing VTA Bus Routes 23 and Rapid 523. A new bus stop would be constructed at 
the project frontage along West San Carlos Street. The project would also include 
ample bicycle parking and street/sidewalk improvements that would facilitate bicycle 
and pedestrian access to the site.  
5.  West San Carlos Urban Village Plan 
The subject site has a land use designation of Urban Village and is located within the 
boundaries of the West San Carlos Urban Village. Within the Urban Village, the project 
is  located  within  the  Mixed-Use  Residential  Character  Area.  The  Mixed-Use 
Residential Character Area is an eastern gateway into the Urban Village. The area is 
envisioned  with  higher-density  mixed-use  and  residential  development  drawing 
energy from nearby Downtown San José and the Diridon Station. Development in the 
 
  6 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
West  San  Carlos  Urban  Village    ranges  between  three  and  seven  stories  with 
residential  uses  typically  above  a  mix  of  active  ground  floor  retail.  The  allowed 
residential density of this land use designation may range from 55 to 250 Dwelling 
Units per Acre (DU/AC). The project is consistent with the following goals and policies 
of the approved Stevens Creek Urban Village Plan: 
•  Land Use Goal LU-2: Create a high-density, mixed-use, pedestrian-focused Urban 
Village that supports the commercial activity along West San Carlos Street and 
enhances the quality of life for residents in surrounding communities.  
•  Land Use Policy LU-2.2: Ensure that residential development along West San 
Carlos Street and Meridian Avenue that is developed under the Urban Village Land 
Use Designation and located within the Mixed-Use Residential Character Area has 
ground-floor commercial and/or active uses fronting those streets. 
•  Parks, Plazas, and Public Art Policy P-2.5: Employ green buffers/paseos when 
larger new development abuts existing neighborhoods or is located in such a way 
that allows for the continuation of a green paseo. 
•  Land Use Goal LU-3: Ensure that new development and area improvements 
increase access to public space and to alternate modes of transportation.  
Analysis: The subject site is located within the West San Carlos Urban Village Plan, 
which was approved by City Council on May 8, 2018 (Resolution No. 78581). The 
project is consistent with the Urban Village land use designation, as it provides a high-
intensity mix of residential and commercial retail uses. The project frontages include 
ground floor commercial space and active space on both West San Carlos Street and 
Buena Vista Avenue. The project would include the construction of two seven-story 
buildings  with  173  residential  units  and  approximately  17,836  square  feet  of 
commercial retail space located on the frontage along West San Carlos Street. The 
project would also include the construction of a 30-foot-wide full landscaped paseo in 
the rear of the site, which would eventually connect to the Buena Vista Avenue and 
Willard Avenue, should the sites to the east and west be redeveloped. The paseo 
would buffer the subject site from the lower density development to the south. As 
discussed in the General Plan section above, the project would implement a TDM plan 
that would encourage the use of public transportation. Bicycle parking would also be 
provided for residents, employees, and retail customers. The project would construct 
20-foot-wide sidewalks along West San Carlos Street to improve pedestrian access 
to and from the site.  
West San Carlos Urban Village Design 
The project conforms with the following key standards and guidelines of the West San 
Carlos Urban Village Plan, Chapter 5 Urban Design Concept. This Chapter provides 
an overall urban design framework for development within the West San Carlos Urban 
Village. 
 
  7 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
•  Urban Design Policy UD-3.2: Leverage private development to strengthen the 
public realm with improvements such as setbacks to accommodate space for wider 
sidewalks, shade-providing trees, and other pedestrian amenities. Explore the 
potential for “green buffer” strategies to integrate and expand local parks, open 
spaces, and pedestrian and bicycle pathways. 
•  Urban Design Policy UD-3.3: Encourage the placement of ground-floor commercial 
space in new development especially along the street frontages of West San 
Carlos Street and Bascom Avenue. 
•  Urban Design Policy UD-3.5: Provide proper height transitions between new, 
higher-density commercial and mixed-use development and adjacent single-family 
homes by using building setback, upper story stepback, and landscaping to soften 
the transition near property lines. 
•  Urban Design Policy UD-5.7: Non-occupiable architectural features such as roof 
forms, chimneys, stairwells, and elevator housings may project up to ten feet above 
the maximum height limits, but shall not exceed the established daylight plane.  
•  Urban Design Policy UD-6.1: Encourage the use of underground vehicle parking 
where feasible.  
Analysis: Both buildings would be located and oriented toward West San Carlos 
Street. Each building would provide clearly marked entrances and active frontages 
with  transparent  glass.  As  previously  discussed,  the  project  would  include 
approximately 17,836 square feet of retail space along West San Carlos Street. The 
Phase 1 building is adjacent to a property designated as Residential Neighborhood. 
Therefore, the project provides a stepback of the upper floors so as to not intercept 
the 45-degree daylight plane at the adjacent residential property line. Both buildings 
are landscaped at the rear to further soften the transition between the high intensity 
use along West San Carlos Street and the residential character of the neighborhood 
to the south. As previously discussed, the project also includes a 30-foot-wide paseo 
at the rear of the site that would eventually connect to Willard Avenue and Buena Vista 
Avenue to allow for an additional pedestrian path and recreational space for the 
neighborhood. The project would improve pedestrian circulation and access with the 
construction of 20-foot-wide sidewalks along West San Carlos Street as well as 12-
foot-wide sidewalks along Buena Vista Avenue. Both sidewalks would be landscaped 
with street trees to the satisfaction of the Department of Transportation (DOT).   
6.  Zoning Ordinance Compliance.  The subject site is located in the CP Commercial 
Pedestrian  Zoning  District  and  the  R-M  Multiple  Residence  Zoning  District.  Per 
AB3194, the project was evaluated for conformance with the objective standards and 
criteria of the CP Commercial Pedestrian Zoning District, the conforming Zoning 
District to the Urban Village General Plan Land Use Designation. Pursuant to Section 
20.40.100  and  Table 20-90  (see  Note 25) of  the  Zoning  Ordinance, mixed  use 
residential/commercial requires a Special Use Permit in the CP Zoning District when 
 
  8 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
located in an Urban Village.    
Setbacks and Height 
Development  Required  Phase 1  Phase 2 
Standard 
Front setback  None   None  None 
Side, interior setback  None  None  None 
Side, corner  None  None  None 
Rear, interior   15 feet  30 feet  N/A 
Rear, corner  15 feet  N/A  15 feet 
Maximum height   95 feet  92 feet  92 feet 
The project conforms with all setback and height requirements of the Zoning Code 
and West San Carlos Village Plan. The West San Carlos Urban Village Plan allows a 
maximum height of 85 feet at the subject site. Non occupiable architectural features 
such as roof forms, chimneys, stairwells, and elevator housing may project up to ten 
feet above the maximum height limits, for a total maximum height of 95 feet. As shown 
on the project plans the maximum height of the elevator shaft and stairwells of both 
buildings would be 92 feet.  
  Parking 
SP20-004 Vehicle Parking 
  Commercial  Residential  Total 
  Studio  JR1 Bed  1 Bed  2 Bed  3 Bed   
Sq.  15,160.6 sf of  17  35  48  70  3 
Ft/Unit  floor area 
Count 
Parking  1/200 sf  1.25  1.25  1.25  1.7  2.0 
Ratio 
Spaces  75.8  21.25  43.75  60  119  6  326 
Required 
Spaces  189 vehicle spaces provided (42% parking reduction) 
Provided 
 
 
  9 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The project requires 328 vehicle parking spaces. Pursuant to Section 20.90.220 of the 
Zoning Code, a parking reduction of up to 50% of the code required parking spaces 
may be permitted for sites within a Growth Area and the implementation of a TDM 
plan. The project would provide 189 vehicle parking spaces on-site, an approximately 
42% parking reduction. Up to 20% of the parking reduction would be allowed as the 
project is located within the West San Carlos Urban Village, a growth area. The 
additional 22% parking reduction would be allowed with the implementation of a TDM 
plan. A TDM plan, dated September 8, 2020 was prepared by Hexagon Transportation 
Consultants, Inc, which achieves a 22% parking reduction. In addition to providing the 
required  bicycle  parking  spaces,  showers,  and  lockers,  the  project  would  also 
implement additional TDM measures in accordance with Section 20.90.220 of the 
Municipal Zoning Code. The project would be required to provide an online kiosk of 
trip-planning resources, 100 percent unbundled parking for all residential spaces, VTA 
SmartPasses to all residential tenants, and on-site bicycle storage.  
In addition to the approximately 42% parking reduction, the project requires a total of 
47 motorcycle parking spaces and 52 bicycle parking spaces. The project would 
provide 49 motorcycle parking spaces and 73 bicycle parking spaces.  
  Noise 
  Pursuant to Section 20.40.600 of the Municipal Zoning Code, the maximum noise level 
for commercial uses adjacent to a commercial property line is 60 decibels, and adjacent 
to a property used or zoned for residential uses is 55 decibels. A Noise Study, titled 
“1530-1544 West San Carlos Street Mixed-Use Development Noise and Vibration 
Assessment”, was prepared by Illingworth & Rodkin Inc. on March 26, 2020. The noise 
study evaluated noise related to the construction and operations of the project, from 
various noise sensitive receptors surrounding the project site.  The study also measured 
future exterior noise resulting from the use of communal open space in the exterior of 
each building. Exterior noise levels were calculated from the center of each outdoor 
common open space area. Noise measurements were taken from across West San 
Carlos Street to the north, along the east side of Buena Vista Avenue to the southwest 
of the site, and in the center of the site where the Phase 2 building would be located. 
Specifically, the noise study evaluated outdoor use areas at the proposed site, including 
the courtyards and common open spaces on the third, fifth, and seventh floors of the 
buildings. The noise study found that noise related to the common open space area at 
the common open spaces would not exceed 55 decibels. Furthermore, the seventh-
floor roof terrace would be reduced to below 55 decibels as it would be the furthest from 
West San Carlos street, and would be shielded by the building edge.  
 
  10 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
  All construction noise would be temporary and is expected to take approximately 48 
months. The Environmental Impact Report includes mitigation measures to address 
noise impacts related to construction. Mitigation measures require the applicant to 
submit a noise logistics plan as outlined in the West San Carlos Project Environmental 
Impact Report. As the site is located within 500 feet of a residence, the construction 
hours would be limited to 7:00 AM to 7:00 PM Monday through Friday.   
Tree Removals 
  Chapter 13.32 of the Municipal Code regulates the removal of trees on private property. 
An  ordinance-size  tree  is  any  tree  that  is  38  inches  in  circumference  or  greater 
measured from 4.5 feet above the ground. A tree survey of the site was prepared by 
David J. Powers and Associates, dated April 29, 2019.  The tree survey identified 14 
trees located within the project site boundary and one tree adjacent to the project site. 
Of the 15 trees, five were unable to be identified due to lack of access to the trees; 
therefore, these trees were conservatively estimated as ordinance-size non-native 
species. The other ten trees are identified as Apple (1), Southern Magnolia (1), Blue 
Jacaranda (1), Boxelder (1), Chinese Firethorn (2), White Willow (1), White Crepe 
Myrtle (1), Blue Potato Bush (1), and Australian blackwood (1).  Eleven of the 15 trees 
are ordinance-size and four are non-ordinance size. 
  Based on the findings of the tree survey, all 15 trees require removal. The trees to be 
removed are located either within the building footprint, within the newly dedicated 
sidewalks, within the paseo area, or within necessary driveways. Therefore, retaining 
the 15 trees would prevent the project from meeting its project objectives and the goals 
of the urban design requirements of the Urban Village land use designation and the 
West San Carlos Urban Village Plan.  
  The removal of all 15 trees on-site requires the replacement of 26 trees (24-inch box) 
on site. Based on review of the approved plan set, 26 24-inch box trees would be 
planted on-site. The trees to be planted include a mix of Maidenhair, Litteleaf Linden, 
Accolade Elm, Sweet Bay, Brisbane Box, Flowering Plum, Flowering Cherry, Bronze 
Loquat, Dwarf Southern Magnolia, and Sawleaf Zelkova trees. 
 
7.  City  Council  Policy  6-30:  Public  Outreach  Policy  for  Pending  Land  Use 
Development Proposals 
Staff followed Council Policy 6-30: Public Outreach Policy in order to inform the public 
of the proposed project. A notice of the public hearing was distributed to the owners 
and tenants of all properties located within 1,000 feet of the project site and posted 
on the City website. The staff report is also posted on the City’s website. Staff has 
also been available to respond to questions from the public. 
A formally noticed Community Meeting with the Environmental Scoping was held on 
Monday, January 9, 2020 to introduce the project to the community. Approximately 22 
members of the public attended the meeting. The questions and comments from 
 
  11 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
community members included concerns related to building height, traffic, parking, lack 
of retail options, and sidewalk safety during construction. 
8.  Design Guidelines 
The project was submitted on April 29th, 2019, prior to the effective date of the Citywide 
Design Standards and Guidelines on March 25th, 2021. The Commercial Design 
Guidelines were adopted in May 1990 and the Residential Design Guidelines were 
adopted in February 1997. Both the Commercial and Residential Design Guidelines 
were effective when this Special Use Permit was formally submitted to the City. 
Therefore, the project is required to conform with the following provisions of the City’s 
Commercial Design Guidelines and Residential Design Guidelines, in addition to 
conformance with the Stevens Creek Urban Design Policies.   
•  Pedestrian Orientation: Mixed use projects should include direct and attractive 
pedestrian access to all nearby commercial areas, transit stops, and transit 
stations. Sidewalks and walkways should be wide, separated from conflicting 
activities, and bordered by attractive landscaping, most importantly by street 
and/or shade trees. 
•  Mix of Uses:  
  Retail uses should be limited to the ground floor spaces along busy 
o
street frontages. 
  Office uses may be located on the first and/or upper floors. 
o
•  Interface  Between  Uses:  Commercial  loading  areas,  trash  facilities,  and 
mechanical equipment should be screened from sight by all pedestrian ways 
and should be located away from residential entries. 
•  Building  Orientation:  Buildings  should  be  oriented  parallel  to  the  street 
particularly  at  corners.  Buildings  and,  in  particular,  entrances  should  be 
oriented towards light rails stations and bus stops. 
•  Structured  Parking: Structured  parking  is preferable  for  vertical mixed-use 
projects and for horizontal mixed-use projects in more urban locations. Parking 
which is intended to support commercial uses should be placed in convenient 
proximity to such uses. The blank walls of parking floors should not be placed 
along streets or major pedestrian ways. 
Analysis: The scale and massing of both buildings are compatible within the 
development as well as within the surrounding neighborhood, which is 
planned as an area of significant residential and employment growth. Both 
buildings  have  zero  front  and  side  setbacks  at  the  street  frontages, 
consistent with both the Commercial Design Guidelines, Zoning Code and 
West San Carlos Urban Village Plan.  
Both seven-story mixed use buildings contain the three traditional portions 
 
  12 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
of a building, the base, middle, and top. Active retail and lobby space is 
provided on the ground floor with well-defined entrances and transparent 
glass. All parking would be screened from view along West San Carlos 
Street, with the majority of the parking structure located at the rear of the 
site away from the street or underground. The corner element of the Phase 
2  building  is  defined  and  the  project  includes  façade  articulation  and 
recessed  windows  with  minimal  mullions.  Both  buildings  also  include 
adequate provisions for trash, storage and loading/service areas located in 
the ground floor parking garage. All rooftop mechanical equipment would 
be screened from view on both buildings.   
•  All  areas  not  covered  by  building  streets,  drives,  or  parking  should  be 
landscaped. The developer should plant street trees of an approved species 
and size along all public and private streets. Landscaping should be provided 
in all setback areas between project walls and/or fences. 
Analysis: As previously discussed, the project includes the construction of 
a paseo at the rear of the subject site that is planned to connect to Buena 
Vista Avenue to the west and Willard Avenue to the east. The paseo would 
remain as private common open space until it is connected to the public 
right-of-way and offered as a privately owned, publicly accessible open 
space. The paseo and all common open space areas would be landscaped 
with trees, shrubs, grasses, and ground cover. The portion of the property 
adjacent  to  the  single-family  houses  along  the  paseo  would  be  well 
landscaped to screen the site and soften the transition between the project 
and adjacent residential uses. The project would also plant street trees 
along both project frontages. The species and number of street trees is to 
be  determined  at  the  public  improvements  stage  by  the  Public  Works 
Department.   
•  Residential Open Space: Private open space should be provided at a minimum 
of 60 square feet per unit with a minimum dimension of 6 feet. Common Open 
Space should be provided at a minimum of 100 square feet per unit.  
Analysis: Both buildings provide adequate private and common open space. 
Each unit would include a minimum of 60 square feet of private open space 
in the form of private balconies. The project would include 173 units and a 
total of 26,680 square feet of common open space. Therefore, approximately 
154 square feet of common open space would be provided per unit. Both 
buildings would include a mix of terraces and courtyards on the third, fifth, 
and seventh floors.  
9.  Environmental Review. 
An Environmental Impact Report (EIR) (State Clearinghouse Number 2019120341) 
was prepared by the Director of Planning, Building and Code Enforcement for the 
 
  13 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
West  San  Carlos  Street  Mixed-Use  Project  (SP20-004))  in  compliance  with  the 
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the CEQA Guidelines. The City of 
San Jose, as the lead agency for the project, prepared a Draft EIR for this project 
which was circulated for public review and comment for 45 days, from January 12, 
2021 through February 26, 2021. The draft EIR concluded that implementation of the 
proposed project would result in a significant impact on historic resources (Candidate 
City Landmarks).  
Identified Significant Unavoidable Impacts 
CUL-1:  Implementation of the proposed project would result in the demolition 
of the Craftsman-style house and the seven Spanish Revival- style 
bungalows on-site that are eligible City Landmarks, a significant 
impact.  
CUL(C)-1:  Implementation  of  the  proposed  project  would  result  in  a 
cumulatively  considerable  contribution  to  a  significant  cultural 
resources  impact  to  the  remaining  Craftsman-style  houses  and 
bungalow courts in the City.  
 
The EIR determined that the residences located on the project site (1530 West San 
Carlos Street), were eligible as candidate City Landmark structures and the proposed 
demolition would be a significant and unavoidable impact. Even though mitigation 
measures  that  include  documentation,  relocation,  and  salvage  would  lessen  the 
impact, the residences and the historic connection to the current location would be 
lost. Therefore, the impact would be significant and unavoidable. 
 
In  addition,  mitigation  measures  were  developed  to  lessen  the  following  project 
impacts to less than significant levels: exposure of sensitive receptors to toxic air 
contaminants, disturbance and/or destruction of migratory nesting birds, exposure of 
workers to residual contamination from previous industrial operations at the project 
site, exposure of sensitive receptors to construction noise, and damage to adjacent 
structures from construction vibration.  
Standard Permit Conditions are also required to ensure no impacts occur during 
construction and operation of the project. These Standard Permit Conditions include 
best management practices for construction related air quality impacts, compliance 
with the Santa Clara Valley Habitat Plan, compliance with the California Building Code 
for  seismic  safety  of  the  proposed  building,  erosion  control  during  construction 
activities, protection of unknown subsurface resources, protection of construction 
workers from hazards related to asbestos containing materials and lead-based paint, 
water quality impacts during construction, and impacts to public facilities. 
 
CEQA Alternatives 
 
 
  14 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
As required under CEQA, the EIR identified and evaluated alternatives to the project. 
Three critical factors considered in the selection and evaluation of the alternatives 
included: (1) the significant impacts from the project that could be reduced or avoided 
by an alternative, (2) consistency with the project’s objectives, and (3) the feasibility 
of the alternatives available. The environmental analysis considered three project 
alternatives as briefly outlined below, further analysis is included in the EIR.  
No Project – No Development Alternative 
The No Project – No Development Alternative assumes that the project site would 
remain  as  it  is  today,  which  includes  the  existing  auto  commercial,  commercial 
(restaurant), and residential development on-site. The No Project No Development 
Alternative would avoid all of the project’s environmental impacts. The No Project – 
No Development Alternative would not meet any of the project objectives. In addition, 
the existing development is lower than the 0.3 FAR density encouraged under the 
West  San  Carlos  Urban  Village  Plan,  since  the  site  currently  contains  lower 
commercial FAR and du/ac than the 0.3 FAR minimum requirement. Because the No 
Project – No Development Alternative would not result in any development on the site, 
this Alternative would avoid all of the environmental impacts of the project. However, 
this Alternative would not meet any of the project objectives. 
No Project – Existing Land Use Designation Alternative  
The No Project – Existing Land Use Designation Alternative is essentially the same 
as the proposed project. This alternative was proposed when the project still included 
a PD Planned Development Zoning application to rezone the site from the existing CP 
Commercial  Pedestrian  Zoning  District  and  the  R-M  Multiple  Residence  Zoning 
District to a Planned Development Zoning District. This alternative maintained the 
existing zoning districts and would have constructed a similar project consistent with 
the General Plan designation and zoning districts. The originally proposed PD zoning 
would have afforded the project more flexibility in terms of site design and setbacks. 
Under Assembly Bill 3194, the Housing Accountability Act Amendment, effective 
January 1, 2019, the local governments’ authority is limited and cannot reject or 
restrict housing development projects that comply with applicable objective general 
plan, zoning, and subdivision standards.  Because rezoning is no longer required, 
there is no land use designation alternative. Importantly, alternatives are alternatives 
that would feasibly attain most of the basic objectives of the project but would avoid 
or substantially lessen any of the significant impacts of the project. Because this 
alternative does not reduce any impacts, it is not a reasonable or feasible alternative.  
Design Alternative 
The Design Alternative – Replace and Restore Five of the Seven Historic Bungalows 
would lessen the project’s impact on the historic resources by relocating and restoring 
five of the seven historic Spanish Revival-style bungalows on the site. This alternative 
would require the project to be redesigned in a manner that would preserve the historic 
 
  15 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
resources to the extent feasible while still allowing a physically feasible development 
on the project site. The proposed Building 1 of the Project would be redesigned with 
a reduced building footprint to allow five of the historic bungalow units to be relocated 
and preserved on the southern portion of the site. The proposed Building 2 would 
remain the same as the proposed project. The five bungalow units would be situated 
in a horseshoe layout and facing each other to form a central court in the middle, 
recreating a similar court-like court as the existing unit layout. Building 1, under this 
alternative,  would  have  24  fewer  residential  units,  11,165  square  feet  less  of 
commercial space, and 18,923 square feet less common space. Building 1 would 
include 79 residential units, 10,000 square feet of commercial space, and 6,000 
square feet of common space, which combined with Building 2 would result in a 
density of 111 du/ac and 0.29 commercial floor-area ratio (FAR). Additionally, Building 
1 would be set back at least 95 feet from the southern property line. Building stories 
and height would remain the same. Access to the site and bungalow units would be 
provided on the proposed driveway on West San Carlos Street. This design alternative 
would preserve five of the seven bungalow units and would lessen the impact to the 
historic resources but not to a less than significant level even with the restoration of 
the buildings consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards. reduce the 
significant impact to the historic resources by restoring the buildings consistent with 
the City’s and Secretary of the Interior’s requirements for historic buildings. All other 
impacts during construction and operation would be similar to that of the proposed 
project.  
Circulation and Public Comments 
 
The Draft EIR was circulated for public review for 45 days consistent with CEQA 
Guidelines Section 15132 starting on January 12, 2021 and ending on February 26, 
2021.  Comments  were  received  from  regional  and  local  agencies,  including  the 
County  of  Santa  Clara,  Roads  and  Airport  Department,  the  Santa  Clara  Valley 
Transportation  Authority  (VTA),  and  the  Santa  Clara  Valley  Water  District;  and 
organizations, businesses, and individuals, including a letter from Lozeau Drury, LLP. 
and Pacific Gas & Electric Company (PG&E).  
Issues raised in these comment letters include the following: 
County of Santa Clara, Roads and Airport Department: City annexation of project 
pockets  to  address  all  neighborhood  traffic-related  issues  within  those  pockets. 
Reference to the annexation clause within the 2006 Settlement Agreement between 
the County and the City of San Jose.  
VTA: Request for the project to coordinate bus stop improvements to consolidate stop 
locations along West San Carlos Street and opportunity to review updated site plans 
to ensure the placement of driveways, landscaping and any other features do not 
conflict with bus operations; and comment on the proposed crossing at San Carlos 
Street and Willard Avenue.  
 
  16 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
Lozeau Drury LLP (dated February 26, 2021) on behalf of the Laborers International 
Union of North America (LiUNA): 1) Draft EIR fails to discuss indoor air quality impacts 
related to the project, in particular emissions of formaldehyde; 2) Draft EIR relies on 
unsubstantiated input parameters to estimate project emissions and thus fails to 
provide substantial evidence of the project’s air quality impacts; 3) the Draft EIR failed 
to disclose a significant air quality impact from ROG emissions; 4) the Draft EIR fails 
to adequately evaluate health risks from diesel particulate matter emissions; 5) The 
Draft EIR inadequately evaluated the project’s cumulative impacts.  
 
Response to Public Comments addressed in First Amendment 
In  accordance  with  CEQA  Guidelines  Section  15088,  a  First  Amendment  was 
prepared  to  provide  responses  to  public  comments  submitted  during  the  public 
circulation period and revisions to the text of the Draft EIR. As contained within the 
First Amendment, comments received either did not address the adequacy of the Draft 
EIR or the comment did not identify new or more significant impact, or a new feasible 
project alternative or mitigation measure considerably different than identified in the 
Draft EIR. For these reasons, no further CEQA analysis is required and the Draft EIR 
does not require recirculation. The Draft EIR taken together with the First Amendment 
constitutes the Final EIR. The Draft EIR and First Amendment to the Draft EIR are 
available  for  review  on  the  project  page  on  the  City’s  Active  EIRs  website  at: 
www.sanjoseca.gov/ActiveEIRs. 
EIR Recirculation Unnecessary 
The comments received do not identify substantive inadequacies in the Draft EIR or 
new  previously  unidentified  significant  impacts  that  require  recirculation.  The 
recirculation of an EIR is required when significant new information is added to the 
EIR after public notice is given of the availability of the Draft EIR for public review but 
before certification. “Information” can include changes in the project or environmental 
setting as well as additional data or other information. New information added to a 
Draft EIR is not “significant” unless the Draft EIR is changed in a way that deprives 
the  public  of  meaningful  opportunity  to  comment  on  a  substantial  adverse 
environmental effect of the project or a feasible way to mitigate or avoid such an effect 
(CEQA Guidelines Section 15088.5). 
Statement of Overriding Considerations 
The  City  Council  specifically  adopts  and  makes  this  Statement  of  Overriding 
Considerations that this Project has eliminated or substantially lessened all significant 
effects on the environment where feasible, and finds that the remaining significant and 
unavoidable impact of the Project is acceptable in light of the economic and social 
considerations  noted  below,  because  the  benefits  of  the  Project  outweigh  the 
significant and unavoidable impact of the Project.  The City Council finds that the 
overriding considerations set forth below constitutes a separate and independent 
 
  17 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
ground  for  finding  that  the  benefits  of  the  Project  outweigh  its  significant  and 
unavoidable  environmental  impact  and  is  an  overriding  consideration  warranting 
approval of the Project.  These matters are supported by evidence in the record that 
includes, but is not limited to, the Envision San José 2040 General Plan, Zoning 
Ordinance and the West San Carlos Urban Village:  
Furthers  Envision  San  José  2040  General  Plan  Strategies,  Goals,  and 
Policies.  
Major Strategy #3 Focused Growth: The Project site is located within an identified 
Growth Area (Urban Village). The growth capacity for the West San Carlos Urban 
Village is 980 jobs and 1,245 residential units. The Plan considers one job as equal 
to 300 square feet of a commercial building’s square footage, which translates into 
294,000 square feet of capacity for new commercial development.  The project 
proposes to construct 173 multifamily dwelling units and approximately 17,836 
square feet of commercial use, generating approximately 554 residents and 60 
employees, which is a net increase of 528 residents and 34 employees. The two 
seven-story buildings ae sited within a transit priority area primary served by VTA 
Bus Routes 23 and 523 (considered major transit stops because the routes have 
headways of 15 minutes during the AM and PM peak commute periods, and is in 
close proximity to Downtown. The project would support job growth by providing 
neighborhood-supportive retail spaces  along West San Carlos Street and provide 
new housing units to meet the City’s increasing housing demand. 
Provision of a Paseo: In addition to the residential/commercial mixed uses, the 
project  would  include  a  30-foot  walkway  that  wraps around  the  building  and 
connects to the proposed driveway and the sidewalk on West San Carlos Street 
to the proposed private paseo which is part of the project and envisioned for the 
West San Carlos Urban Village. 
Land Use Goal LU-3 and Transportation Policy TR-4.1: The Project encourages 
the use of alternative transportation options through its proximity to public transit, 
and  the  inclusion  of  bicycle  parking  for  its  residential  and  commercial  uses. 
Additionally, he project would replace and widen the existing 10-foot sidewalk to 
20 feet with landscape strip on the project frontage on West San Carlos Street – a 
Grand  Boulevard-  and  would  also  replace  and  widen  the  existing  eight-foot 
sidewalk to 15 feet with landscape strip on the project frontage on South Buena 
Vista Avenue. The project site is also within 1.5 miles of the Diridon Transit Depot, 
a station served by ACE, Caltrain, Greyhound, Amtrak, VTA bus lines, and the 
future BART line. 
Furthers the vision, and design goals of the West San Carlos Urban Village.  
The area is envisioned with higher-density mixed-use and residential development 
drawing  energy  from  nearby  Downtown  San  José  and  the  Diridon  Station. 
Development  is  proposed  to  range  between  three  and  seven  stories  with 
 
  18 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
residential uses above a mix of active ground-floor retail. 
Urban Design Policy UD-3.2: Leverage private development to strengthen the 
public realm with improvements such as setbacks to accommodate space for wider 
sidewalks, shade-providing trees, and other pedestrian amenities. Explore the 
potential for “green buffer” strategies to integrate and expand local parks, open 
spaces, and pedestrian and bicycle pathways. The project would include the 
construction of a 30-foot-wide full landscaped paseo in the rear of the site, which 
would eventually connect to the Buena Vista Avenue and Willard Avenue, should 
the sites to the east and west be redeveloped. 
Development in Transit Rich Area and along a Grand Boulevard. The project 
site is located along West San Carlos Street - a Grand Boulevard that is served by 
several bus lines. The project site is also within 1.5 miles from the Diridon Transit 
Depot, a station served by ACE, Caltrain, Greyhound, Amtrak, VTA bus lines, and 
the future BART line.   
Complete Communities.  The proposed development also includes 12,818 square 
feet of outdoor common open space and 9,412 square feet of indoor amenity 
space in the proposed buildings, and a 4,450-square foot private paseo. The 
development will also provide on-site parking for vehicles and bicycles, both for 
the residential component and the retail component of the project. The project will 
advance the Envision San José 2040 General Plan policies to create a complete 
community with a mixed-use building with an amenity-rich residential use and new 
commercial/retail uses placed within walking distance of neighborhoods and the 
commercial businesses along West San Carlos Street. Placing complementary 
land uses like residential and commercial/retail uses near each other will reduce 
the  number  of  single-occupancy  automobile  trips  and  vehicle  miles  traveled 
compared with the equivalent amount of development in a more suburban location 
where uses are separated. Less trips would contribute to a decrease in project-
generated greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Each  of  the  above  benefits  of  the  proposed  Project  were  weighed  against  its 
significant unavoidable impact identified in the EIR.  The City Council determined that 
these benefits outweigh the adverse environmental effect of the Project and, therefore, 
further  determined  that  the  adverse  environmental  effect  is  acceptable  and 
overridden. 
 
10. Special Use Permit Findings:  Section 20.100.720 of the San José Municipal Code 
specifies the required findings for the approval of a Conditional Use Permit.   
a.  The Special Use Permit, as approved, is consistent with and will further the policies 
of the General Plan and applicable Specific Plans and Area Development Policies; 
and 
 
  19 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
Analysis: As discussed above, the project is consistent with the General Plan goals 
and policies for focused growth, Urban Villages, land use, and employment. The 
project would also be consistent with the goals and policies of the West San Carlos 
Urban Village for land use, employment, and urban design. The project would 
provide a high intensity mix of residential and commercial retail uses. The project 
would  provide  jobs,  retail  options,  and  recreational  opportunities  in  a  central 
location  with  the  construction  of  two  seven-story  buildings  consisting  of  173 
residential units and 17,836 square feet of commercial retail space. The project 
would also provide a 30-foot-wide paseo in the rear of the phase one building, that 
would ultimately provide an inter-block connection from Buena Vista Avenue to 
Willard Avenue upon redevelopment of the sites to the east and west. 
b.  The Special Use Permit, as approved, conforms with the zoning code and all other 
provisions of the San José Municipal Code applicable to the project; and 
Analysis: As discussed in the Zoning Ordinance Compliance section above, the 
project is consistent with all applicable height and setback requirements of the 
Zoning Code and the approved West San Carlos Urban Village Plan. The project 
would  also  provide  the  required  number  of  vehicle  parking  spaces  with  an 
approximately 42% parking reduction through the implementation of a TDM plan. 
The project provides all required clean air vehicle, bicycle, motorcycle parking 
requirements. Operational noise including indoor and outdoor areas, mechanical 
equipment, and would conform with the Zoning Code requirements for noise in a 
Commercial and Residential Zoning District. Additionally, the project includes the 
removal of 11 ordinance-size and four non-ordinance-size trees. The removal of 
all 15 trees on-site requires the replacement of those trees with 26 trees (24-inch 
box trees) on site. Based on the plans provided, 26 24-inch box trees would be 
planted on-site. 
c.  The Special Use Permit, as approved, is consistent with applicable City Council 
policies, or counterbalancing considerations justify the inconsistency; and 
Analysis: The project was duly noticed per Council Policy 6-30: Public Outreach 
Policy  for  Pending  Land  Use  and  Development  Proposals  and  on-site 
noticing/posting  requirements. A  joint Environmental  Scoping and  Community 
Meeting was held on January 9, 2020. The meeting was attended by approximately 
22 members of the public. 
d.  The proposed use at the location requested will not: 
i.  Adversely affect the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of persons 
residing or working in the surrounding area; or 
ii.  Impair the utility or value of property of other persons located in the vicinity 
of the site; or 
iii.  Be detrimental to public health, safety, or general welfare; and 
 
  20 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
Analysis:  As  described  above,  the  mixed-use  project,  including  the 
commercial retail space, would not impact the peace, health, safety, morals 
or welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding area. The 
residential, retail space, and common areas would be located wholly within 
the project site, and all activity in these spaces would not impact the area 
outside of the building. The project would not impair the utility or value of 
property or persons in the immediate area as any use in the retail portion 
of the project would be fully contained in the building and would not impact 
any adjacent property.   
e.  The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls, 
fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping and other development features 
prescribed in this title, or as is otherwise required in order to integrate the use with 
existing and planned uses in the surrounding area; and 
Analysis: The approximately 1.34-gross acre site would be adequate in size to 
accommodate the two mixed-use buildings as well as the necessary common 
outdoor space, landscaping, parking and loading. As described above, all parking 
would be located on either the ground level, behind the retail storefronts, or in a one 
level subterranean garage. Common outdoor space, including landscaping, would 
be located at the rear of both buildings, or on the upper floors where they would be 
accessible to residents. The paseo at the southern end of the Phase I building would 
be 30 feet wide and would soften the transition between the new development and 
the residential neighborhoods to the south.  
f.  The proposed site is adequately served: 
i.  By highways or streets of sufficient width and improved as necessary to 
carry the kind and quantity of traffic such use would generate; or by other 
forms of transit adequate to carry the kind and quantity of individuals such 
use would generate; and 
ii.  By other public or private service facilities as are required. 
Analysis: Vehicular access to the site would be from West San Carlos Street, with 
right-in/right-out turns only. Regional vehicular access would be provided from West 
San Carlos Street and Interstate 280, located approximately 2,300 feet to the south. 
Pedestrian access would be provided from West San Carlos Street and Buena Vista 
Avenue.  VTA Route 23 bus stops are located directly across West San Carlos 
Street to the north and directly across Buena Vista Avenue to the west. The project 
is located in an urbanized area and is served by all required utilities and services. A 
Traffic Memo was prepared by the Department of Public Works, dated May 24, 
2021. The Local Transportation Analysis (LTA) found that the four nearest signalized 
intersections, and one unsignalized intersection, and vehicle queueing for nearby 
left turn lanes would continue to operate acceptably with the completion of the 
project. The project is conditioned to install a crosswalk at the east leg of West San 
 
  21 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
Carlos  Street  and  Buena  Vista  Avenue  with  a  traffic  signal  modification  to 
accommodate the reconfiguration. The project is also required to construct a new 
bus stop with a bus pad along the project frontage. As discussed above, the project 
would also implement a TDM Plan required for the approximately 42% parking 
reduction. With the inclusion of the conditions and implementation of the TDM plan, 
the project would be in conformance with the City of San José Transportation 
Analysis Police (Council Policy 5-1). 
11. Site Development Permit Findings. Section 20.100.630 of the San José Municipal 
Code specifies the required findings for the approval of a Site Development Permit.  
a.  The Site Development Permit, as approved, is consistent with and will further the 
policies of the General Plan and applicable specific plans and area development 
policies. 
Analysis: See Special Use Permit Finding A above. 
b.  The Site Development Permit, as approved, conforms with the zoning code and all 
other provisions of the San José Municipal Code applicable to the project. 
Analysis: See Special Use Permit Finding B above. 
c.  The  Site  Development  Permit,  as  approved,  is  consistent  with  applicable  City 
Council Policies or counterbalancing considerations justify the inconsistency. 
Analysis: See Special Use Permit Finding C above.  
d.  The interrelationship between the orientation, location, and elevations of proposed 
buildings  and  structures  and  other  uses  on-site  are  mutually  compatible  and 
aesthetically harmonious. 
Analysis: Both buildings would be seven stories tall and have a maximum height of 
92 feet. The entrances of the buildings would be oriented towards West San Carlos 
Street. The parking garage would be located towards the rear of the site, away from 
the primary activity areas of the development, with one level located underground. 
The  project  also  includes  a  30-foot-wide  paseo,  which  would  provide  on-site 
connectivity between future developments to the east and west. 
e.  The orientation, location and elevation of the proposed buildings and structures and 
other uses on the site are compatible with and are aesthetically harmonious with 
adjacent development or the character of the neighborhood. 
  Analysis: The subject site is surrounded by low density single-family and multifamily 
residences to the south, commercial uses to the east and west, and multifamily 
residential uses across West San Carlos Street to the north. Both buildings would 
be located along West San Carlos Street, with the highest portions of both buildings 
located away from lower density development to the south. The Phase 2 building 
would be stepped back from the single-family residences to the south with the 
incorporation  of  a  45-degree  daylight  plane.  Additionally,  a  30-foot-wide  fully 
 
  22 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
landscaped paseo would be constructed in the rear of the site to further buffer the 
high-density development from the lower density residential uses to the south. The 
project would provide a mix of housing, retail, and recreational opportunities and 
would revitalize an existing underutilized commercial area within the West San 
Carlos Urban Village. 
f.  The environmental impacts of the project, including but not limited to noise, vibration, 
dust, drainage, erosion, storm water runoff, and odor which, even if insignificant for 
purposes of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), will not have an 
unacceptable negative affect on adjacent property or properties.  
Analysis: The project development occurs in an urbanized area on a parcel that is 
fully developed with existing commercial buildings and surface parking lots. An 
Environmental Impact Report (EIR) was completed for the project and mitigation 
measures were identified for implementation during construction and operation to 
reduce potentially significant impacts; therefore, with implementation of standard 
conditions, best management practices and mitigation measures, there would be no 
significant impacts from noise, vibration, dust, drainage, erosion, stormwater runoff 
and odor  from the project. Furthermore, the project would include a TDM plan to 
reduce automobile trips, consistent with parking reduction requirements. Therefore, 
the project would not have an unacceptable impact on adjacent properties.   
g.  Landscaping, irrigation systems, walls and fences, features to conceal outdoor 
activities,  exterior  heating,  ventilating,  plumbing,  utility  and  trash  facilities  are 
sufficient to maintain or upgrade the appearance of the neighborhood. 
Analysis: Both buildings include screening for all rooftop mechanical equipment as 
well as landscape screening for the adjacent residential area to the south. The 
ground floor garage is located behind the ground floor retail along West San Carlos 
Street. The garage screening on Buena Vista Avenue includes dark formed metal 
panels and composite metal panels that adequately screen the garage from view of 
the street, while maintaining consistency in color and materials with the larger 
building. All trash, storage, and utility facilities are located indoors.  
h.  Traffic access, pedestrian access and parking are adequate. 
Analysis: Vehicular access to the site would be from West San Carlos, with right-
in/right-out turns only. Regional vehicular access would be provided from West San 
Carlos Street and Interstate 280, located approximately 2,300 feet to the south. 
Pedestrian access would be provided from West San Carlos Street and Buena Vista 
Avenue.  VTA Route 23 bus stops are located directly across West San Carlos 
Street to the north and directly across Buena Vista Avenue to the west. Additionally, 
the project would include the relocation and construction of a new bus stop at the 
front of the project site. The project is located in an urbanized area and is served by 
all required utilities and services. The project provides the required number of 
vehicle parking spaces in a conveniently located parking garage with a 42% parking 
 
  23 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
reduction through the implementation of a TDM plan. The project provides all 
required bicycle, motorcycle, clean air, and EV parking as required by the Zoning 
Code. 
12. Parking Reduction Findings. Section 20.90.220 of the San José Municipal Code 
specifies the required findings for a reduction in the required number of off-street 
vehicle parking spaces. 
a.  The structure or use is located within two thousand (2,000) feet of a proposed or 
an existing rail station or bus rapid transit station, or an area designated as a 
Neighborhood Business District, or as an Urban Village, or as an area subject to 
an area development policy in the City’s General Plan or the use is listed in Section 
20.90.220G; and 
b.  The structure or use provides bicycle parking spaces in conformance with the 
requirements of Table 20-90. 
c.  For any reduction in the required off-street parking spaces that is more than twenty 
percent, the project shall be required to implement a Transportation Demand 
Management (TDM) program that contains but is not limited to one of the following 
measures: 
i.  Implement  a  carpool/vanpool  or  car-share  program,  e.g.,  carpool  ride-
matching  for  employees,  assistance  with  vanpool  formation,  provision  of 
vanpool or car-share vehicles, etc., and assign carpool, vanpool and car-
share parking at the most desirable on-site locations at the ratio set forth in 
the development permit or development exception considering type of use; or 
ii.  Develop a transit use incentive program for employees and tenants, such as 
on-site distribution of passes or subsidized transit passes for local transit 
system  (participation  in  the  regionwide  Clipper  Card  or  VTA  SmartPass 
system will satisfy this requirement). 
d.  In addition to the requirements of Section 20.90.220 A, for any reduction in the 
required off-street parking spaces that is more than twenty percent, the project 
shall be required to implement a TDM program that contains but is not limited to at 
least two of the following measures in Section 20.90.200 A.1.d. 
Analysis: The project requires 328 vehicle parking spaces. Pursuant to Section 
20.90.220 of the Zoning Code, a parking reduction of up to 50% of the code 
required parking spaces may be permitted for sites within a Growth Area with the 
implementation of a TDM Plan.  A total of 189 vehicle parking spaces would be 
provided with the implementation of a TDM Plan to allow for an approximately 
42% parking reduction. A TDM Plan, dated September 8, 2020 was prepared by 
Hexagon Transportation Consultants, Inc, which reviewed the possibility of an 
approximately 42% parking reduction. In addition to providing the required bicycle 
parking  spaces,  showers,  and  lockers,  the  project  would  also  implement 
 
  24 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
additional TDM measures in accordance with Section 20.90.220 of the Municipal 
Zoning Code. The project would be required to provide an online kiosk of trip-
planning resources, 100 percent unbundled parking for all residential spaces, VTA 
SmartPasses to all residential tenants, and on-site bicycle storage. 
13. Tree Removal Permit Findings. Section 13.32.100 of the San José Municipal Code 
specifies the required findings for live tree removals. 
a.  That the condition of the tree with respect to disease, danger of falling, proximity to 
an existing or proposed structure, and/or interference with utility services, is such 
that preservation of the public health or safety requires its removal. 
b.  That the location of the tree with respect to a proposed improvement unreasonably 
restricts the economic development of the parcel in question; or 
Analysis: The project includes the removal of 15 trees (11 ordinance-sized and four 
non-ordinance-sized). The trees to be removed are located either within the project 
building footprint, within the newly dedicated sidewalks, within the paseo area, or 
within necessary driveways. Fourteen of the trees are located within the project 
boundary; one tree is adjacent to the boundary. Based on findings from the tree 
survey prepared for the site by David J. Powers and Associates dated April 29, 2019, 
and on the project objectives, the trees could not be preserved because they restrict 
the economic development of the site pursuant to urban design requirements of the 
Urban Village land use designation and the West San Carlos Urban Village Plan. 
The removal of all 15 trees on-site requires the replacement of 26 trees (24-in box) 
on site. Based on the approved development plan, 26 24-inch box trees would be 
planted on-site. The trees to be planted include a mix of Maidenhair, Litteleaf Linden, 
Accolade Elm, Sweet Bay, Brisbane Box, Flowering Plum, Flowering Cherry, Bronze 
Loquat, Dwarf Southern Magnolia, and Sawleaf Zelkova trees. 
14. Demolition  Permit  Findings.    Chapter  20.80  of  the  San  José  Municipal  Code 
establishes evaluation criteria for the issuance of a permit to allow demolition. 
a.  The failure to approve the permit would result in the creation or continued existence 
of a nuisance, blight or dangerous condition; 
b.  The failure to approve the permit would jeopardize public health, safety or welfare; 
c.  The approval of the permit should facilitate a project that is compatible with the 
surrounding neighborhood; 
d.  The approval of the permit should maintain the supply of existing housing stock in 
the City of San José; 
e.  Both  inventoried  and  non-inventoried  buildings,  sites  and  districts  of  historical 
significance should be preserved to the maximum extent feasible; 
f.  Rehabilitation or reuse of the existing building would not be feasible; and 
g.  The  demolition,  removal  or  relocation  of  the  building  without  an  approved 
 
  25 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
replacement  building  should  not  have  an  adverse  impact  on  the  surrounding 
neighborhood.  
Analysis: The project includes the demolition of three existing commercial buildings, 
eight residential buildings, associated service structures, and one billboard totaling 
approximately 14,131 square feet. The approval of the demolition permit would not 
result in the creation or continued existence of a nuisance, blight or dangerous 
condition. The failure to approve the permit would not jeopardize public health, 
safety or welfare. The demolition permit would facilitate a project that is compatible 
with  the  surrounding  neighborhood.  As  previously  discussed,  the  project  is 
consistent with all applicable General Plan and West San Carlos Urban Village Plan 
goals and policies, zoning code requirements, applicable city council policies, and 
design  guidelines.  The  demolition  of  the  existing  commercial  buildings  would 
facilitate the construction of two mixed-use buildings with 173 residential units and 
17,836 square feet of commercial retail space. Given the scope of the project, the 
rehabilitation or reuse of any of the existing buildings on-site would not be feasible. 
Based on the Historic Resources Evaluation report, prepared by Treanor HL in July 
2019, demolition of the residences at 1530 West San Carlos Street, eligible as 
candidate City Landmark structures, would be a significant and unavoidable impact. 
Even  though  mitigation  measures  that  include  documentation,  relocation,  and 
salvage would lessen the impact, the residences and the historic connection to the 
current location would be lost. Therefore, the impact would be significant and 
unavoidable. The City Council has considered the impacts resulting from demolition 
of  the  potential  historic  resources  and,  issuing  a  statement  of  overriding 
considerations, finds that the public benefits from the project outweigh the impacts. 
The demolition of any existing buildings on-site would not be approved until the 
issuance of a grading or building permit, whichever comes first, as conditioned in 
this Special Use Permit for the subject site.  
In accordance with the findings set forth above, a Special Use Permit and Site Development 
Permit to use the subject property for said purpose specified above and subject to each 
and all of the conditions hereinafter set forth is hereby granted.  This City Council expressly 
declares that it would not have granted this Permit except upon and subject to each and all 
of said conditions, each and all of which conditions shall run with the land and be binding 
upon the owner and all subsequent owners of the subject property, and all persons who 
use the subject property for the use conditionally permitted hereby. 
 
APPROVED SUBJECT TO THE FOLLOWING CONDITIONS: 
1.  Acceptance of Permit.  Per Section 20.100.290(B), should the permittee fail to file a 
timely and valid appeal of this Special Use Permit and Site Development Permit 
(collectively  “Permit”)  within  the  applicable  appeal  period,  such  inaction  by  the 
permittee shall be deemed to constitute all of the following on behalf of the permittee: 
 
  26 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
a.  Acceptance of the Permit by the permittee; and 
b.  Agreement by the permittee to be bound by, to comply with, and to do all things 
required  of  or by the  permittee pursuant  to  all of  the  terms,  provisions, and 
conditions of this Permit or other approval and the provisions of Title 20 of the San 
José Municipal Code applicable to such Permit. 
2.  Permit Expiration.  This Permit shall automatically expire four (4) years from and 
after the date of issuance hereof by the City Council, if within such time period, a 
Building Permit (for foundation or vertical construction) has not been obtained or, if no 
Building  Permit  is  required,  the  use  has  not  commenced,  pursuant  to  and  in 
accordance with the provisions of this Permit. The date of issuance is the date this 
Permit is approved by the City Council. However, the Director of Planning may 
approve a Permit Adjustment/Amendment to extend the validity of this Permit in 
accordance with Title 20. The Permit Adjustment/Amendment must be approved prior 
to the expiration of this permit.  
3.  Lot  Line  Adjustment  Required.  Prior  to  the  issuance  of  a  building  permit  the 
Permittee shall secure approval of Lot Line Adjustment merging three lots into one lot 
and shall provide proof of recordation of the approved Lot Line Adjustment to the City 
Planning Division.  
4.  Building Permit/Certificate of Occupancy.  Procurement of a Building Permit and/or 
Certificate of Occupancy from the Building Official for the structures described or 
contemplated  under  this  Permit  shall  be  deemed  acceptance  of  all  conditions 
specified in this Permit and the Permittee's agreement to fully comply with all of said 
conditions.  No change in the character of occupancy or change to a different group 
of occupancies as described by the Building Code shall be made without first obtaining 
a Certificate of Occupancy from the Building Official, as required under San José 
Municipal Code Section 24.02.610, and any such change in occupancy must comply 
with all other applicable local and state laws. 
5.  Use Authorization.  Subject to all conditions herein, this Permit allows the demolition 
of three existing commercial buildings, eight residential buildings, associated service 
structures, and one billboard totaling 14,131 square feet, the removal of 15 trees (11 
ordinance-size, four non ordinance-size) and to allow the construction of two seven-
story  residential mixed  use  buildings,  including 173  residential units and  17,836 
square feet of commercial retail space with an approximately 42 percent parking 
reduction with the implementation of a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) 
plan on an approximately 1.34-gross acre site.   
6.  Implementation  of  a  Transportation  Demand  Management  (TDM)  Plan.  The 
project  is  required  to  implement  the  TDM  Measures  included  in  the  TDM  Plan 
prepared by Hexagon Transportation Consultants, Inc., dated September 8, 2020, as 
amended, for the life of the project. TDM Measures include: 
a.  Online kiosk of trip-planning resources 
 
  27 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
b.  100 percent unbundled parking for all residential spaces 
c.  VTA SmartPasses to all residential tenants 
d.  On-site bicycle storage 
7.  Sewage Treatment Demand.  Pursuant  to Chapter 15.12 of Title 15 of the San José 
Municipal  Code,  acceptance  of  this  Permit  by  permittee  shall  constitute 
acknowledgement of receipt of notice by permittee that (1) no vested right to a Building 
Permit shall accrue as the result of the granting of this Permit when and if the City 
Manager makes a determination that the cumulative sewage treatment demand of the 
San José-Santa Clara Regional Wastewater Facility represented by approved land 
uses in the area served by said Facility will cause the total sewage treatment demand 
to meet or exceed the capacity of San José-Santa Clara Regional Wastewater Facility 
to treat such sewage adequately and within the discharge standards imposed on the 
City by the State of California Regional Water Quality Control Board for the San 
Francisco Bay Region; (2) substantive conditions designed to decrease sanitary 
sewage associated with any land use approval may be imposed by the approval 
authority;  (3)  issuance  of  a  Building  Permit  to  implement  this  Permit  may  be 
suspended, conditioned or denied where the City Manager is necessary to remain 
within the aggregate operational capacity of the sanitary sewer system available to 
the City of San José or to meet the discharge standards of the sanitary sewer system 
imposed on the City by the State of California Regional Water Quality Control Board 
for the San Francisco Bay Region.    
8.  Conformance to Plans.  The development of the site and all associated development 
and improvements shall conform to the approved Special Use Permit Plans, “1530-
1544 W. San Carlos St Mixed Use Development, SP20-004” dated received March 
3rd, 2021, on file with the Department of Planning, Building and Code Enforcement, as 
may be amended and approved by the Director of Planning, Building, and Code 
Enforcement, and to the San José Building Code (San José Municipal Code, Title 24).  
The plans are referred to herein as the “approved plans” or the “Approved Plan Set”. 
9.  Tree  Protection  Standards.  The  permittee  shall  maintain  the  trees  and  other 
vegetation shown to be retained in this project and as noted on the Approved Plan 
Set.  Maintenance shall include pruning and watering as necessary and protection 
from construction damage.  Prior to the removal of any tree on the site, all trees to be 
preserved shall be permanently identified by metal numbered tags.  Prior to issuance 
of the Grading Permit or removal of any tree, all trees to be saved shall be protected 
by chain link fencing, or other fencing type approved by the Director of Planning.  Said 
fencing shall be installed at the dripline of the tree in all cases and shall remain during 
construction.  No storage of construction materials, landscape materials, vehicles or 
construction activities shall occur within the fenced tree protection area.  Any root 
pruning required for construction purposes shall receive prior review and approval and 
shall be supervised by the consulting licensed arborist.  Fencing and signage shall be 
 
  28 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
maintained by the permittee to prevent disturbances during the full length of the 
construction period that could potentially disrupt the habitat or trees.  
10. Permit Posting.  Prior to commencement of and during removal of any ordinance-
size tree pursuant to this Permit, the permittee shall post on the site, or cause to be 
posted, a copy of this validated Permit in conformance with the following:  
a.  The copy of the Permit shall be a minimum size of 8.5 inches by 11.0 inches; shall 
be posted at each public street frontage within two feet of the public sidewalk or 
right-of-way; and shall be posted in such a manner that the Permit is readable from 
the public sidewalk or right-of-way; or 
b.  If the site does not have a public street frontage, a copy of the Permit shall be 
posted at a location where the Permit is readable from a common access driveway 
or roadway.   
11. Presentation of Permit.  During removal of any ordinance-size tree pursuant to this 
Permit, the permittee shall maintain the validated Permit on the site and present it 
immediately  upon  request  by  the  Director  of  Planning,  Building  and  Code 
Enforcement, Police Officers or their designee. 
12. Nuisance. This use shall be operated in a manner which does not create a public or 
private nuisance.  Any such nuisance must be abated immediately upon notice by the 
City of San José.   
13. Conformance with Municipal Code.  No part of this approval shall be construed to 
permit a violation of any part of the San José Municipal Code. 
14. Compliance  with  Local,  State,  and  Federal  Laws.   The  subject  use  shall  be 
conducted in full compliance with all local, and, state, and federal laws.    
15. Required Vehicular, Motorcycle, and Bicycle Parking.  This project shall conform 
to  the  vehicular,  motorcycle,  and  bicycle  parking  requirements  of  the  Zoning 
Ordinance, as amended. Any changes to the required vehicular, motorcycle, or bicycle 
parking  requires  the  issuance  of  a  Permit  Adjustment  or  Amendment  to  the 
satisfaction of the Director of Planning, Building and Code Enforcement.   
16. Discretionary  Review.   The  City  maintains  the  right  of  discretionary  review  of 
requests  to  alter  or  amend  structures,  conditions,  or  restrictions  of  this  Permit 
incorporated  by  reference  in  accordance  with  Chapter  20.100  of  the  San  José 
Municipal Code.  
17. Window Glazing. Unless otherwise indicated on the Approved Plan, all windows shall 
consist of a transparent glass.  
18. Refuse.  All trash and refuse storage areas shall be effectively screened from view 
and covered and maintained in an orderly state to prevent water from entering into the 
trash  or  refuse  container(s).   Trash  areas  shall  be  maintained  in  a  manner  to 
discourage illegal dumping.   
 
  29 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
19. Outdoor Storage.  No outdoor storage is allowed or permitted unless designated on 
the Approved Plan Set.    
20. Utilities.  All new on-site telephone, electrical, and other service facilities shall be 
placed underground.   
21. Mechanical Equipment. The location and type of mechanical equipment shall be 
shown on the Approved Plans and shall be screened from view. Changes to the 
mechanical equipment requires the issuance of a Permit Adjustment or Amendment 
to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning.  
22. Anti-Graffiti.  All graffiti shall be removed from buildings and wall surfaces, including 
job sites for projects under construction, within 48 hours of defacement.   
23. Anti-Litter.  The site and surrounding area shall be maintained free of litter, refuse, 
and debris. Cleaning shall include keeping all publicly-used areas free of litter, trash, 
cigarette butts, and garbage.   
24. Sign Approval. No signs are approved at this time. All proposed signs shall be subject 
to review and approval by the Director of Planning through a subsequent Permit 
Adjustment.  
25. Property  Maintenance.  The  property  shall  be  maintained  in  good  visual  and 
functional condition. This shall include, but not be limited to, all exterior elements of 
the buildings such as paint, roof, paving, signs, lighting, and landscaping.   
26. Outdoor Lighting.  All new on-site, exterior, unroofed lighting shall conform to the 
City’s Outdoor Lighting Policy and shall use fully cut-off and fully shielded, low-
pressure sodium fixtures unless otherwise approved with this project.  Lighting shall 
be designed, controlled and maintained so that no light source is visible from outside 
of the property 
27. Landscaping.  Planting and irrigation shall be provided, as indicated, on the Approved 
Plan Set. Landscaped areas shall be maintained and watered, and all dead plant 
material shall be removed and replaced by the property owner.  Irrigation shall be 
installed in accordance with Part 3 of Chapter 15.11 of Title 15 of the San José Municipal 
Code, Water Efficient Landscape Standards for New and Rehabilitated Landscaping.   
28. Reclaimed Water.  The project shall conform to Chapter 15.10 and 15.11 of the San 
José Municipal Code for use of reclaimed water and shall include an irrigation system 
designed  to  allow  for  the  current  and  future  use  of  reclaimed  water  for  all 
landscaping.   
29. No Generators Approved.  This Permit does not include the approval of any stand-
by/backup electrical power generation facility. Any future stand-by/backup generators 
shall secure appropriate permits and shall conform to the regulations of Title 20 of the 
Municipal Code. 
 
  30 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
30. No Extended Construction Hours. This Permit does not allow any construction 
activity on a site located within 500 feet of a residential unit before 7:00 a.m. or after 
7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, or at any time on weekends.    
31. Building and Property Maintenance.  The permittee shall maintain the property in good 
visual and functional condition.  This shall include, but not be limited to all exterior 
elements of the building such as paint, roof, paving, signs, lighting and landscaping. 
32. Street Number Visibility. Street numbers of the buildings shall be easily visible from 
the street at all times, day and night.  
33. Green Building Requirements. This development is subject to the City’s Green 
Building Ordinance for Private Sector New Construction as set for in Municipal Code 
Section 17.84. Prior to the issuance of any shell permits, or complete building permits, 
for the construction of buildings approved through the scope of this Permit, the 
Permittee shall pay a Green Building Refundable Deposit.  In order to receive a refund 
of the deposit, the project must achieve the minimum requirements as set forth in 
Municipal Code Section 17.84. The request for the refund of the Green Building 
Deposit together with evidence demonstrating the achievement of the green building 
standards indicated in Municipal Code Section 17.84 shall be submitted within a year 
after the building permit expires or becomes final, unless a request for an extension 
is  submitted  to  the  Director  of  Planning,  Building,  and  Code  Enforcement  in 
accordance with Section 17.84.305D of the Municipal Code.  
34. Affordable Housing Requirements.  The project is subject to the City’s Inclusionary 
Housing Ordinance (IHO) and each of the conditions below: 
a.  The permittee must execute and record their City Affordable Housing Agreement 
memorializing  the  IHO  obligations  against  the  property  and  any  contiguous 
property under common ownership and control prior to earliest of: issuance of any 
public permits, or approval of any parcel or final map. 
b.  Permittee must strictly comply with each requirement of the approved Affordable 
Housing Compliance Plan, the Affordable Housing Agreement, and any other 
applicable requirements of the IHO. 
c.  No building permit may be issued until the Affordable Housing Agreement is 
recorded against the property. No building permit may issue except consistent with 
the requirements of the IHO and the proposed Plan to fulfill the affordable housing 
obligations. 
d.  No Temporary Certificate of Occupancy, Certificate of Occupancy, or Notice of 
Completion for any units shall be issued until all requirements of the IHO and 
Affordable Housing Agreement are met. 
35. Demolition Permit. Obtainment of a Demolition Permit is evidence of acceptance of 
all conditions specified in this document and the permittee’s intent to fully comply with 
said conditions.  
 
  31 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
36. Timing  for  Demolition.  Buildings  and  structures  that  are  being  removed  to 
accommodate the new development shall not be removed until the related Public 
Works grading permit has been issued.  
37. Conformance to Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program. This project shall 
conform to all applicable requirements of the Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting 
Program (MMRP) approved for this development by City Council Resolution No._____ 
38. Standard Environmental Conditions 
a.  Air Quality 
i.  Water active construction areas at least twice daily or as often as needed to 
control dust emissions. 
ii.  Cover trucks hauling soil, sand, and other loose materials and/or ensure that all 
trucks hauling such materials maintain at least two feet of freeboard. 
iii.  Remove visible mud or dirt track-out onto adjacent public roads using wet power 
vacuum street sweepers at least once per day. The use of dry power sweeping is 
prohibited. 
iv.  Enclose, cover, water twice daily or apply non-toxic soil binders to exposed 
stockpiles (dirt, sand, etc.). 
v.  Pave new or improved roadways, driveways, and sidewalks as soon as possible. 
vi.  Lay building pads as soon as possible after grading unless seeding or soil binders 
are used. 
vii. Replant vegetation in disturbed areas as quickly as possible. 
viii. Install sandbags or other erosion control measures to prevent silt runoff to public 
roadways. 
ix.  Minimize idling times either by shutting off equipment when not in use, or reducing 
the maximum idling time to five minutes (as required by the California airborne 
toxics control measure Title 13, Section 2485 of California Code of Regulations). 
x.  Provide clear signage for construction workers at all access points. 
xi.  Maintain  and  property  tune  construction  equipment  in  accordance  with 
manufacturer’s specifications. Check all equipment by a certified mechanic and 
record a determination of running in proper condition prior to operation. 
xii. Post a publicly visible sign with the telephone number and person to contact at 
the lead agency regarding dust complaints. 
b.  Biological  Resources:  The  trees  removed  by  the  project  would  be  replaced 
according to tree replacement ratios required by the City, as provided in Table 3.4-1 
below. 
 
  32 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
i.  The project is subject to applicable Santa Clara Valley Habitat Plan (SCVHP) 
conditions and fees (including the nitrogen deposition fee) prior to issuance of any 
grading permits. The project applicant shall submit a SCVHP Coverage Screening 
Form or Nitrogen Deposition Only Application Form (if no land cover fees apply) 
to the Director of Planning, Building and Code Enforcement or the Director’s 
designee for review and shall complete subsequent forms, reports, and/or studies 
as needed.  The Habitat Plan supporting materials can be viewed at www.scv-
habitatagency.org. 
Table 3.4-1:  Tree Replacement Ratios 
Type of Tree to be Removed2  Minimum Size of 
Circumference of 
Each Replacement 
Tree to be Removed1  Native  Non-Native  Orchard 
Tree 
38 inches or more3  5:1  4:1  3:1  15-gallon container 
19 – 38 inches  3:1  2:1  None  15-gallon container 
Less than 19 inches  1:1  1:1  None  15-gallon container 
1 As measured 4.5 feet above ground level 
2 x:x = tree replacement to tree loss ratio 
3 Ordinance-sized tree 
Notes:  Trees greater than or equal to 38 inches in circumference shall not be removed unless a Tree 
Removal Permit, or equivalent, has been approved for the removal of such trees. For multi-family 
residential, commercial, and industrial properties, a Tree Removal Permit is required for removal of 
trees of any size. 
A 38-inch tree is 12.1 inches in diameter. 
One 24-inch box tree = two 15-gallon trees. 
 
c.  Cultural Resources: The following Standard Permit Condition is required to avoid 
impacts to yet unknown subsurface cultural resources. 
Subsurface  Cultural  Resources.  If  prehistoric  or  historic  resources  are 
encountered during excavation and/or grading of the site, all activity within a 50-
foot radius of the find shall be stopped, the Director of Planning, Building and Code 
Enforcement or the Director’s designee and the City’s Historic Preservation Officer 
shall  be  notified,  and  a  qualified  archaeologist  shall  examine  the  find.  The 
archaeologist shall 1) evaluate the find(s) to determine if they meet the definition 
of  a  historical  or  archaeological  resource;  and  2)  make  appropriate 
recommendations regarding the disposition of such finds prior to issuance of 
building permits.  Recommendations  could  include  collection,  recordation,  and 
analysis of any significant cultural materials. A report of findings documenting any 
data recovery shall be submitted to the Director of Planning, Building and Code 
Enforcement or the Director’s designee and the City’s Historic Preservation Officer 
and the Northwest Information Center (if applicable). Project personnel shall not 
collect or move any cultural materials. The project applicant shall implement the 
recommendations of the qualified archaeologist. 
 
  33 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
The following measures shall be applied to the project to reduce and/or avoid 
impacts to human remains: 
i.  If any human remains are found during any field investigations, grading, or 
other construction activities, all provisions of California Health and Safety Code 
Sections  7054  and  7050.5  and  Public  Resources  Code  Sections  5097.9 
through 5097.99, as amended per Assembly Bill 2641, shall be followed. If 
human remains are discovered during construction, there shall be no further 
excavation or disturbance of the site or any nearby area reasonably suspected 
to overlie adjacent remains. The project applicant shall immediately notify the 
Director of Planning, Building and Code Enforcement or the Director’s designee 
and the qualified archaeologist, who shall then notify the Santa Clara County 
Coroner. The Coroner will make a determination as to whether the remains are 
Native  American.  If  the  remains are  believed  to  be  Native  American,  the 
Coroner will contact the Native American Heritage Commission (NAHC) within 
24 hours. The NAHC will then designate a Most Likely Descendant (MLD). The 
MLD will inspect the remains and make a recommendation on the treatment of 
the remains and associated artifacts. If one of the following conditions occurs, 
the landowner or his authorized representative shall work with the Coroner to 
reinter the Native American human remains and associated grave goods with 
appropriate dignity in a location not subject to further subsurface disturbance: 
a)  The NAHC is unable to identify a MLD or the MLD failed to make a 
recommendation within 48 hours after being given access to the site; 
b)  The MLD identified fails to make a recommendation; or 
c)  The  landowner  or  his  authorized  representative  rejects  the 
recommendation of the MLD, and the mediation by the NAHC fails to 
provide measures acceptable to the landowner. 
d.  Geology and Soils: The following Standard Permit Condition is required to avoid 
seismic and seismic-related impacts. 
i.  To avoid or minimize potential damage from seismic shaking, the project shall 
be  constructed  using  standard  engineering  and  seismic  safety  design 
techniques. Building design and construction at the site shall be completed in 
conformance  with  the  recommendations  of  an  approved  geotechnical 
investigation. The report shall be reviewed and approved by the City of San 
José Department of Public Works as part of the building permit review and 
issuance process. The buildings shall meet the requirements of applicable 
Building and Fire Codes as adopted or updated by the City. The project shall 
be designed to withstand soil hazards identified on the site and the project shall 
be designed to reduce the risk to life or property on site and off site to the extent 
feasible and in compliance with the Building Code. 
 
  34 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
ii.  All excavation and grading work shall be scheduled in dry weather months or 
construction sites shall be weatherized. 
iii.  Stockpiles and excavated soils shall be covered with secured tarps or plastic 
sheeting. 
iv.  Ditches shall be installed, if necessary, to divert runoff around excavations and 
graded areas. 
v.  The project shall be constructed in accordance with the standard engineering 
practices in the California Building Code, as adopted by the City of San José. 
A grading permit from the San José Department of Public Works shall be 
obtained prior to the issuance of a Public Works clearance. These standard 
practices will ensure that the future building on the site is designed to properly 
account for soils-related hazards on the site. 
The following measures shall be applied to development of the project site to 
reduce and/or avoid impacts to paleontological resources: 
a)  If vertebrate fossils are discovered during construction, all work on the site 
shall stop immediately and a qualified professional paleontologist shall 
assess the nature and importance of the find and recommend appropriate 
treatment. Treatment may include, but is not limited to, preparation and 
recovery of fossils so that they can be housed in an appropriate museum or 
university  collection  and  may  also  include  preparation  of  a  report  for 
publication describing the finds. The project applicant shall be responsible 
for implementing the recommendations of the qualified paleontologist. A 
report of all findings shall be submitted to the Director of Planning, Building 
and Code Enforcement or Director’s designee. 
e.  Hazards and Hazardous Materials: The project shall implement the following 
measures to reduce impacts related to lead-based paint and asbestos: 
i.  In conformance with State and local laws, a visual inspection/pre-demolition 
survey, and possible sampling, shall be constructed prior to the demolition of 
on-site building(s) to determine the presence of asbestos-containing materials 
and/or lead-based paint. 
ii.  During demolition activities, all building materials containing lead-based paint 
shall be removed in accordance with California Division of Occupational Safety 
and  Health  (Cal/OSHA)  Lead  in  Title  8,  CCR,  Section  1532.1,  including 
employee training, employee air monitoring, and dust control. Any debris or soil 
containing lead-based paint or coatings shall be disposed of at landfills that 
meet acceptance criteria for the type of lead being disposed. 
 
  35 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
iii.  All potentially friable asbestos-containing materials (ACMs) shall be removed 
in accordance with National Emission Standards for Air Pollution (NESHAP) 
guidelines prior to demolition or renovation activities that may disturb ACMs. 
All demolition activities shall be undertaken in accordance with Cal/OSHA 
standards contained in Title 8, CCR, Section 1529, to protect workers from 
asbestos exposure. 
iv.  A registered asbestos abatement contractor shall be retained to remove and 
dispose of ACMs identified in the asbestos survey performed for the site in 
accordance with the standards stated above. 
v.  Materials  containing  more  than  one  percent  asbestos  are  also  subject  to 
BAAQMD regulations. Removal of materials containing more than one percent 
asbestos shall be completed in accordance with BAAQMD requirements and 
notifications. 
vi.  Based  on  Cal/OSHA  rules  and  regulations,  the  following  conditions  are 
required to limit impacts to construction workers. 
a)  Prior to commencement of demolition activities, a building survey, including 
sampling and testing, shall be completed to identify and quantify building 
materials containing lead-based paint. 
b)  During demolition activities, all building materials containing lead-based 
paint shall be removed in accordance with Cal/OSHA Lead in Construction 
Standard,  Title  8,  CCR,  Section  1532.1,  including  employee  training, 
employee air monitoring, and dust control. 
c)  Any debris or soil containing lead-based paint or coatings shall be disposed 
of at landfills that meet acceptance criteria for the type of waste being 
disposed. 
f.  Hydrology  and  Water  Quality:  Best  Management  Practices  to  prevent 
stormwater pollution and minimize potential sedimentation shall be applied to 
project construction, including but not limited to the following: 
i.  Burlap bags filled with drain rock shall be installed around storm drains to route 
sediment and other debris away from the drains. 
ii.  Earthmoving  or  other  dust-producing  activities  shall  be  suspended  during 
periods of high winds. 
iii.  All exposed or disturbed soil surfaces shall be watered at least twice daily to 
control dust as necessary. 
iv.  Stockpiles of soil or other materials that can be blown by the wind shall be 
watered or covered. 
v.  All trucks hauling soil, sand, and other loose materials shall be covered and all 
trucks shall maintain at least two feet of freeboard. 
 
  36 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
vi.  All paved access roads, parking areas, staging areas, and residential streets 
adjacent to the construction sites shall be swept daily (with water sweepers). 
vii. Vegetation in disturbed areas shall be replanted as quickly as possible.  
viii. All unpaved entrances to the site shall be filled with rock to remove mud from 
tires prior to entering City streets. A tire wash system shall be installed if 
requested by the City. 
ix.  The  project  applicant  shall  comply  with  the  City  of  San  José  Grading 
Ordinance,  including  implementing  erosion  and  dust  control  during  site 
preparation and with the City of San José Zoning Ordinance requirements for 
keeping adjacent streets free of dirt and mud during construction. 
g.  Noise: Prior to the issuance of any building permits, a detailed acoustical study 
shall be prepared during building design to evaluate the potential noise generated 
by building mechanical equipment and to identify the necessary noise controls that 
are included in the design to meet the City’s 55 dBA DNL noise limit at the shared 
property line. The study shall evaluate the noise from the equipment and predict 
noise levels at noise-sensitive locations. Noise control features, such as sound 
attenuators, baffles, and barriers, shall be identified and evaluated to demonstrate 
that mechanical equipment noise would not exceed 55 dBA DNL at noise sentive 
locations, such as residences. The study shall be submitted to the City of San Jose 
for  review  and  approval  prior  to  issuance  of  any  building  permits.”  With 
implementation of the above standard permit condition, the project would result in 
a less than significant mechanical equipment noise impact.     
39. FAA Clearance  Required. Prior  to  issuance  of  any  Building  Permit  for 
construction, the permittee shall obtain from the Federal Aviation Administration a 
“Determination of No Hazard to Air Navigation” for each building high point.  The 
permittee shall abide by any and all conditions of the FAA determinations (if issued) 
such as height specifications, rooftop marking/lighting, construction notifications to 
the FAA through filing of Form 7460-2, and “No Hazard Determination” expiration 
date. The data on the FAA forms shall be prepared by a licensed civil engineer or 
surveyor,  with  location  coordinates  (latitude/longitude)  in  NAD83  datum  out  to 
hundredths of seconds, and elevations in NAVD88 datum rounded off to the next 
highest foot.  
40. Bureau of Fire Department Clearance for Issuing Permits. Prior to the issuance of 
a Building Permit, the project must comply with the California Fire Code as adopted 
or updated by the city.  
41. Building Division Clearance for Issuing Permits.  Prior to the issuance of any 
Building permit, the following requirements shall be met to the satisfaction of the Chief 
Building Official:  
 
  37 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
a.  Construction Plans.  This Permit file number, SP20-004 shall be printed on all 
construction plans submitted to the Building Division.  
b.  Americans with Disabilities Act.  The permittee shall provide appropriate access 
as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).  
c.  Emergency Address Card.  The permittee shall file an Emergency Address Card, 
Form 200-14, with the City of San José Police Department.  
d.  Construction Plan Conformance.  A project construction plan conformance review 
by  the  Planning  Division  is  required.    Planning  Division  review  for  project 
conformance will begin with the initial plan check submittal to the Building Division.  
Prior to any Building Permit issuance, Building Permit plans shall conform to the 
approved Planning development permits and applicable conditions.  
42. Public  Works  Clearance.  Prior  to  the  approval  of  the  Tract  or  Parcel  Map  (if 
applicable) by the Director of Public Works, or the issuance of Building Permits, 
whichever occurs first, the applicant will be required to have satisfied all of the 
following Public Works conditions. The applicant is strongly advised to apply for any 
necessary Public Works permits prior to applying for Building Permits. Standard 
review timelines and submittal instructions for Public Works Permits may be found at: 
http://www.sanjoseca.gov/devresources. 
a.  Construction Agreement: The public improvements conditioned as part of this 
permit require the execution of a Construction Agreement that guarantees the 
completion of the public improvements to the satisfaction of the Director of Public 
Works. This agreement includes privately engineered plans, bonds, insurance, a 
completion deposit, and engineering and inspection fees. 
b.  Transportation (see separate Traffic Memo dates 5/24/2021): With the inclusion 
of the following conditions, the subject project will be in conformance with the City 
of  San  Jose  Transportation  Analysis  Policy  (Council  Policy  5-1)  and  a 
determination  for  less  than  significant  impacts  can  be  made  with  respect  to 
transportation impacts. 
i.  Install a crosswalk across the east leg of the San Carlos Street and Buena Vista 
Avenue  intersection  with  a  traffic  signal  modification  as  needed  to 
accommodate the reconfiguration. 
ii.  Construct a bus stop with bus pad along the project frontage.  
iii.  Prior to Planning approval, implement and submit a Transportation Demand 
Management (TDM) plan to the Planning Project Manager for the additional 
22% parking reduction on top of the 20% reduction allowed in accordance with 
the Urban Village Plan. 
c.  Urban Village Plan: This project is located in a designated Urban Village per the 
Envision San Jose 2040 General Plan. Urban Villages are designed to provide a 
vibrant and inviting mixed-use setting to attract pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit 
 
  38 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
users of all ages and to promote job growth. 
i.  The paseo in the rear of the site will be required to be built to a design as 
approved by the City. The City will require an Irrevocable Offer of Dedication 
for Public Accessibility to be recorded against the property encompassing the 
paseo. In the interim, while the paseo is landlocked from the public right-of-
way, it will remain private. 
d.  Grand Boulevard: This project fronts San Carlos Street/Stevens Creek Boulevard 
which is designated as one of the seven Grand Boulevards per the Envision San 
Jose 2040  General Plan. Grand  Boulevards  are  identified  to  serve  as  major 
transportation corridors for primary routes for VTA light-rail, bus rapid transit, 
standard or community buses, and other public transit vehicles. 
e.  Grading/Geology: 
i.  A grading permit is required prior to the issuance of a Public Works Clearance. 
The construction operation shall control the discharge of pollutants (sediments) 
to the storm drain system from the site. An erosion control plan may be required 
with the grading application. 
ii.  All on-site storm drainage conveyance facilities and earth retaining structures 
4  feet  in  height  or  greater  (top  of  wall  to  bottom  of  footing)  or  is  being 
surcharged (slope of 3:1 or greater abutting the wall) shall be reviewed and 
approved under Public Works grading and drainage permit prior to the issuance 
of Public Works Clearance. The drainage plan should include all underground 
pipes, building drains, area drains and inlets. The project shall provide storm 
drainage calculations that adhere to the 2013 California Plumbing Code or 
submit a stamped and signed engineered design alternative for Public Works 
discretionary approval and must be designed to convey a 10-year storm event. 
iii.  If the project proposes to haul more than 10,000 cubic yards of cut/fill to or from 
the project site, a haul route permit is required. Prior to issuance of a grading 
permit, contact the Department of Transportation at (408) 535-3850 for more 
information concerning the requirements for obtaining this permit. 
iv.  A soils report must be submitted to and accepted by the City prior to the 
issuance of a grading permit. This report should include, but is not limited to: 
foundation,  earthwork,  utility  trenching,  retaining  and  drainage 
recommendations. 
f.  Shoring: 
i.  Shoring plans will be required for review and approval as part of the Grading 
Permit for this project. 
ii.  If tie-backs are proposed in the Public right-of-way as a part of the shoring 
operation, a separate Revocable Encroachment Permit must be obtained by 
the permittee and must provide security, in the form of a CD or Letter of Credit, 
 
  39 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
in the amount of $100,000. All other shoring will not be allowed to encroach 
more than 12” within the public right-of-way (i.e. soldier beams). 
iii.  If  tie-backs  are  proposed  for  use  along  the  adjacent  properties  (277-18-
14/15/16/17/21/24/25/26) agreements between the permittee and the adjacent 
property owner(s) will need to be secured, executed and provided to the Public 
Works Project Engineer prior to approval of the Grading Permit for this project. 
g.  Stormwater Runoff Pollution Control Measures: This project must comply with 
the City’s Post-Construction Urban Runoff Management Policy (Policy 6-29) which 
requires implementation of Best Management Practices (BMPs) which includes 
site  design  measures,  source  controls  and  numerically-sized  Low  Impact 
Development  (LID)  stormwater  treatment  measures  to  minimize  stormwater 
pollutant discharges. 
i.  The project’s Stormwater Control Plan and numeric sizing calculations have 
been reviewed and this project will be in conformance with City Policy 6-29. 
ii.  Final  inspection  and  maintenance  information  on  the  post-construction 
treatment control measures must be submitted prior to issuance of a Public 
Works Clearance. 
iii.  Media Filter Unit(s) located within Building footprints must conform to Building 
Division  Directive  P-005  located  at  the  following: 
https://www.sanjoseca.gov/home/showdocument?id=27405. 
h.  Stormwater Peak Flow Control Measures: The project is located in a non- 
Hydromodification Management area and is not required to comply with the City’s 
Post- Construction Hydromodification Management Policy (Council Policy 8-14). 
i.  Flood Zone D: The project site is not within a designated Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) 100-year floodplain. Flood Zone D is an unstudied 
area where flood hazards are undetermined, but flooding is possible. There are no 
City floodplain requirements for Zone D. 
j.  Sewage Fees: In accordance with City Ordinance all storm sewer area fees, 
sanitary sewer connection fees, and sewage treatment plant connection fees, less 
previous credits, are due and payable prior to issuance of Public Works clearance. 
k.  Parks: This residential project is subject to either the requirements of the City’s 
Park Impact Ordinance (Chapter 14.25 of Title 14 of the San Jose Municipal Code) 
or the Parkland Dedication Ordinance (Chapter 19.38 of Title 19 of the San Jose 
Municipal  Code)  for  the dedication  of  land  and/or payment  of  fees  in-lieu  of 
dedication of land for public park and/or recreational purposes under the “Formula 
for Dedication of Land” and/or “Schedule of Fees and Credits” contained within in 
the chapter. 
l.  Undergrounding: 
 
  40 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
i.  The In-Lieu Undergrounding Fee shall be paid to the City for all frontage 
adjacent to Buena Vista Avenue prior to issuance of a Public Works Clearance. 
100 percent of the base fee in place at the time of payment will be due. 
Currently, the 2021 base fee is $532 per linear foot of frontage and is subject 
to change every January 31st based on the Engineering News Record’s City 
Average Cost Index for the previous year. The project will be required to pay 
the current rate in effect at the time the Public Works Clearance is issued. 
ii.  The Director of Public Works may, at his discretion, allow the developer to 
perform the actual undergrounding of all off-site utility facilities fronting the 
project adjacent to Buena Vista Avenue. Permittee shall submit copies of 
executed utility agreements to Public Works prior to the issuance of a Public 
Works Clearance. 
m. Reimbursement: The permittee will be required to reimburse the City for costs 
advanced for the construction of street improvements along West San Carlos 
Street in accordance with City Ordinance #19663. 
n.  Street Improvements: All street improvements shall be to the satisfaction of the 
Director of Public Works. Any new, or modification to an existing, traffic signal is 
required  to  go  through  a  traffic  signal  “kick-off”  preliminary  review  prior  to 
submitting the application for the Public Street Improvement permit. At least 30 
days prior to submitting an application, send a request to begin the kick-off review 
with  a  scaled  conceptual traffic  signal  plan  showing  right-of-way,  intersection 
geometrics, and signal layout. 
i.  West San Carlos Street frontage: 
a)  Provide 20-foot wide attached sidewalk with tree wells at the back of curb. 
b)  Construct a bus stop with bus pad. 
c)  Proposed driveway width to be 26 feet. 
ii.  Buena Vista Avenue frontage: Provide 12-foot wide attached sidewalk with 
tree wells at the back of curb. 
iii.  West San Carlos Street and Buena Vista Avenue intersection: Install a 
crosswalk  across  the  east  leg  of  the  intersection  with  a  traffic  signal 
modification as needed to accommodate the reconfiguration. 
iv.  Permittee  shall  be  responsible  for adjusting  existing  utility  boxes/vaults  to 
grade, locating and protecting the existing communication conduits (fiber optic 
and copper) along the project frontage. 
v.  Dedication and improvement of the public streets shall be to the satisfaction of 
the Director of Public Works. 
vi.  Repair, overlay, or reconstruction of asphalt pavement may be required. The 
existing pavement will be evaluated with the street improvement plans and any 
 
  41 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
necessary pavement restoration will be included as part of the final street 
improvement plans 
o.  Site Utilization Plan and Revocable Encroachment Permit (Street/Sidewalk 
Closures): At the Implementation stage, Developer shall provide to the Public 
Works Project Engineer a Site Utilization Plan with the application of a Revocable 
Encroachment Permit for any proposed sidewalk and lane closures to support the 
onsite construction activities. 
i.  The following should be included with the Site Utilization Plan and Revocable 
Permit application, but are not limited to: 
a)  Site Utilization Plan and Letter of Intent: The site utilization plan should 
provide a detailed plan of the location of the temporary facilities within the 
boundary of the construction site. The Letter of Intent should provide a 
description  of  operations  of  the  site  as  well  as  the  reasons  for  the 
sidewalk/lane closures and why the activities/uses that are proposed within 
the  Public  right-of-way  can’t  occur  within  the  construction  site.  These 
include the use of the right of way for temporary facilities and activities such 
as man lifts, baker tanks, staging area, concrete pumping activities, etc. The 
letter  must  also  provide  a  detailed  discussion  if  covered  pedestrian 
walkways are infeasible (ex. swinging loads over the sidewalk are not safe 
for pedestrians). 
b)  Multi-Phased Site Specific Sketches: These sketches should show the 
phased  closures  during  the  course  of  construction  with  a  provided 
timeframe estimate of when each phase would be implemented. These 
sketches  should  include  the  type  and  location  of  the  work  to  be 
accomplished within the right-of-way. The exhibit should show in detail the 
vehicular  and/or  pedestrian  diversion  route  that  shows  the  appropriate 
safety equipment, such as barricades, cones, arrow boards, signage, etc. 
ii.  Permittee shall minimize the potential impact to vehicular and pedestrian traffic 
by: 
a)  Implementing the closures at the time the onsite activities dictate the need 
for the closure. 
b)  Minimizing  the  closure  timeframes  to  accomplish  the  onsite  tasks  and 
implement the next phase of the closure as outlined in condition a.ii above. 
iii.  If the proposed lane and parking closures are a part of the Revocable Permit 
Application, permittee shall submit Downtown Lane Closure and Tow Away 
Permit  Applications  to  DOT.  These  applications  may  be  obtained  at: 
http://www.sanjoseca.gov/?navid=1629. Developer shall contact DOT at (408) 
535-8350  for  more  information  concerning  the  requirements  of  these 
applications. 
 
  42 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
p.  Strong  Neighborhoods  Initiative  (SNI):  This  project  is  located  within  the 
Burbank/Del Monte SNI area. Public improvements shall conform to the approved 
EIR and neighborhood improvement plan. 
q.  Electrical: 
i.  Existing electroliers along the project frontage will be evaluated at the public 
improvement stage and any street lighting requirements will be included on the 
public improvement plans. 
ii.  Locate  and  protect  existing  electrical  conduit  in  driveway  and/or  sidewalk 
construction. 
iii.  Provide  clearance  for  electrical  equipment  from  driveways,  and  relocate 
driveway or electrolier. The minimum clearance from driveways is 10 feet in 
commercial areas and 5 feet in residential areas. 
iv.  Provide clearance for electroliers from overhead utilities and request clearance 
from utility companies. Clearance from electrolier(s) must provide a minimum 
of 10 feet from high voltage lines; 3 feet from secondary voltage lines; and 1 
foot from communication lines. 
r.  Street Trees: 
i.  The locations of the street trees will be determined at the street improvement 
stage.  Contact  the  City  Arborist  at  (408)  794-1901  or 
developmentproject@sanjoseca.gov  for  the  designated  street  tree.  Install 
street trees within public right-of-way along entire project street frontage per 
City  standards;  refer to  the  current  “Guidelines  for  Planning,  Design, and 
Construction of City Streetscape Projects.” Street trees shall be installed in cut-
outs at the back of curb. Obtain a DOT street tree planting permit for any 
proposed street tree plantings. Street trees shown on this permit are conceptual 
only. 
a)  West San Carlos Frontage: The recommended street trees are Ulmus 
‘Morton’ planted 35 feet on center. 
b)  Buena Vista Avenue Frontage: The recommended street trees are Zelkova 
serrata ‘Schmidtlow’ planted 35 feet on center. 
ii.  Show all existing trees by species and diameter that are to be retained or 
removed. Obtain a street tree removal permit for any street trees that are over 
6 feet in height that are proposed to be removed. 
35. School Impact Fee. In accordance with California Government Code Section 65996, 
the developer shall pay a school impact fee to the School District, to offset the 
increased demands on school facilities caused by the proposed project.  
36. Revocation,  Suspension,  Modification.    This  Special  Use  Permit  and  Site 
Development Permit may be revoked, suspended or modified by the City Council at 
 
  43 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. NVF:VMT:JMD 
6/30/2021 
 
 
any time regardless of who is the owner of the subject property or who has the right 
to possession thereof or who is using the same at such time, whenever, after a noticed 
hearing in accordance with Part 2, Chapter 20.100, Title 20 of the San José Municipal 
Code it finds: 
a.  A violation of any conditions of the Special Use Permit or Site Development Permit 
was not abated, corrected or rectified within the time specified on the notice of 
violation; or 
b.  A violation of any City ordinance or State law was not abated, corrected or rectified 
within the time specified on the notice of violation; or 
c.  The use as presently conducted creates a nuisance. 
In accordance with the findings set forth above, a permit to use the subject property for said 
purpose specified above is hereby approved. 
 
 
APPROVED this ___ day of  _____________, 2021, by the following vote: 
 
  AYES:  
 
  NOES:   
 
  ABSENT:   
 
DISQUALIFIED:   
 
  ______________________________ 
  SAM LICCARDO 
  Mayor 
ATTEST: 
 
 
____________________________ 
TONI J. TABER, CMC 
City Clerk 
 
NOTICE TO PARTIES 
The time within which judicial review must be sought to review this decision is governed 
by the provisions of the California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
 
 
  44 
T-41004/1834968 
Council Agenda: ___ 
Item No.: ___ 
DRAFT – Contact the Office of the City Clerk at (408) 535-1260 or CityClerk@sanjoseca.gov for 
final document. RESPONSE TO REBUTTAL LETTER TO RESPONSES TO DRAFT EIR 
COMMENTS 
A.  Lozeau Drury LLP to Planning Commission (dated July 14, 2021) 
 
Comment A.1: This comment letter is submitted on behalf of Laborers International Union of North 
America, Local Union No. 270 and its members living and working in and around Union City 
(collectively “LIUNA”) regarding the Draft Environmental Impact Report (“DEIR”) and Final 
Environmental Impact Report (“FEIR”) prepared for the 1530-1536 West San Carlos Mixed-Use 
Project (File No. SP20-004; SCH No. 2019120341) (“Project”) in the City of San Jose (“City”) to be 
heard as Agenda Item 5a at the Planning Commission’s July 14, 2021 meeting.  
 
Response A.1: The City acknowledges that this comment letter was submitted on 
behalf of members of Local Union No. 270 and its members living and working in 
and around Union City. 
 
Comment A.2: This comment supplements LIUNA’s comment letter regarding the DEIR submitted 
on February 26, 2021, incorporated by reference herein (“LIUNA’s DEIR Comment”). LIUNA’s 
DEIR Comment raised concerns as to the DEIR’s analysis and conclusion related to indoor and 
outdoor air quality, cancer risks from emissions of formaldehyde and diesel particulate matter, and 
cumulative impacts. 
 
Although the FEIR contained responses to LIUNA’s DEIR Comment, LIUNA maintains that the EIR 
fails to comply with the California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”) and fails to adequately 
analyze and mitigate the Project’s significant environmental impacts.  
 
Therefore, LIUNA requests that the Planning Commission refrain from recommending approval of 
the Project and FEIR to the City Council. Instead, LIUNA requests the Commission direct staff to 
address the shortcomings described below and in our previous comments in a revised draft 
environmental impact report (“RDEIR”) subject to public review and comment prior to the City’s 
approval of the Project. 
 
I. PROJECT BACKGROUND 
The Project would develop two seven-story buildings with six levels of residential units over two-
levels of parking (one below-grade and one at-grade) on a 1.34-acre project site comprised of three 
contiguous parcels located at 1530, 1536, and 1544 West San Carlos Street in the City of San Jose 
(APNs: 277-18-018, 277-18-019, and 277-18-020). Building 1 (on the east side of the site) would 
include up to 103 residential units and 11,387 square feet of commercial space on the ground level 
and second floor. Building 2 would include up to 70 residential units and 6,449 square feet of 
commercial space on the ground level and second floor. The project would have a density of 
approximately 129 du/ac and a FAR of 0.30. The maximum height of the buildings would be 82 feet 
to the roofline and 92 feet to the highest point of architectural element (stairs).  
 
The project site is currently developed with three commercial buildings (totaling approximately 
7,600 square feet), currently used for automotive businesses, a martial arts studio, and a restaurant, 
and associated ancillary structures and surface parking. Behind the restaurant building, and separated 
by a metal rolling gate, are eight single-family residences and three ancillary parking garages in the 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  1  City of San José – August 2021 
 southern portion of the site. All existing structures are to be demolished. There are 14 trees on-site 
and one off-site street tree, all of which would be removed as part of the proposed development.  
Vehicular access to the site would be provided via a 26-foot wide, two-way driveway on West San 
Carlos Street connecting to the entrance of the parking garages for the two proposed buildings. The 
driveway would be located between the two buildings. The project proposes a total of 189 vehicle 
parking spaces in the parking garages. 
 
II. LEGAL STANDARD 
CEQA requires that an agency analyze the potential environmental impacts of its proposed actions in 
an environmental impact report (“EIR”), except in certain limited circumstances. (e.g., Pub. Res. 
Code § 21100.) The EIR is the very heart of CEQA. (Dunn- Edwards v. BAAQMD (1992) 9 
Cal.App.4th 644, 652.) “The ‘foremost principle’ in interpreting CEQA is that the Legislature 
intended the act to be read so as to afford the fullest possible protection to the environment within the 
reasonable scope of the statutory language.” (Communities for a Better Envt. v. Calif. Resources 
Agency (2002) 103 Cal.App.4th 98, 109.)  
 
CEQA has two primary purposes. First, CEQA is designed to inform decision makers and the public 
about the potential, significant environmental effects of a project. (14 CCR 15002(a)(1).) “Its 
purpose is to inform the public and its responsible officials of the environmental consequences of 
their decisions before they are made. Thus, the EIR ‘protects not only the environment but also 
informed self-government.’” (Citizens of Goleta Valley v. Board of Supervisors (1990) 52 Cal.3d 
553, 564.) The EIR has been described as “an environmental ‘alarm bell’ whose purpose it is to alert 
the public and its responsible officials to environmental changes before they have reached ecological 
points of no return.” Berkeley Keep Jets Over the Bay v. Bd. of Port Comm’rs. (2001) 91 Cal.App.4th 
1344, 1354 (Berkeley Jets); County of Inyo v. Yorty (1973) 32 Cal.App.3d 795, 810.)  
 
Second, CEQA requires public agencies to avoid or reduce environmental damage when “feasible” 
by requiring “environmentally superior” alternatives and all feasible mitigation measures. (14 CCR § 
15002(a)(2), (3); see also, Berkeley Jets, supra, 91 Cal.App.4th 1344, 1354; Citizens of Goleta 
Valley, supra, 52 Cal.3d at 564.) The EIR serves to provide agencies and the public with information 
about the environmental impacts of a proposed project and to “identify ways that environmental 
damage can be avoided or significantly reduced.” (14 CCR 15002(a)(2). If the project will have a 
significant effect on the environment, the agency may approve the project only if it finds that it has 
“eliminated or substantially lessened all significant effects on the environment where feasible” and 
that any unavoidable significant effects on the environment are “acceptable due to overriding 
concerns.” (PRC § 21081; 14 CCR 15092(b)(2)(A), (B).) The lead agency may deem a particular 
impact to be insignificant only if it produces rigorous analysis and concrete substantial evidence 
justifying the finding. (Kings County Farm Bureau v. City of Hanford (1990) 221 Cal.App.3d 692, 
732.)  
 
The EIR is the very heart of CEQA “and the integrity of the process is dependent on the adequacy of 
the EIR.” (Berkeley Jets, supra, 91 Cal.App.4th at 1355.) CEQA requires that a lead agency analyze 
all potentially significant environmental impacts of its proposed actions in an EIR. (PRC § 
21100(b)(1); 14 CCR 15126(a); Berkeley Jets, supra, 91 Cal.App.4th at 1354.) The EIR must not 
only identify the impacts, but must also provide “information about how adverse the impacts will 
be.” (Santiago County Water Dist. v. County of Orange (1981) 118 Cal.App.3d 818, 831.) The lead 
agency may deem a particular impact to be insignificant only if it produces rigorous analysis and 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  2  City of San José – August 2021 
 concrete substantial evidence justifying the finding. (Kings County Farm Bureau, supra, 221 
Cal.App.3d at 732.) “The ‘foremost principle’ in interpreting CEQA is that the Legislature intended 
the act to be read so as to afford the fullest possible protection to the environment within the 
reasonable scope of the statutory language.” (Communities for a Better Envt., supra, 103 
Cal.App.4th at 109.)  
 
While the courts review an EIR using an “abuse of discretion” standard, “the reviewing court is not 
to ‘uncritically rely on every study or analysis presented by a project proponent in support of its 
position. A ‘clearly inadequate or unsupported study is entitled to no judicial deference.’” (Berkeley 
Jets, supra, 91 Cal.App.4th at 1355 [quoting Laurel Heights Improvement Assn. v. Regents of 
University of California (1988) 47 Cal.3d 376, 391, 409 n. 12].) A prejudicial abuse of discretion 
occurs “if the failure to include relevant information precludes informed decisionmaking and 
informed public participation, thereby thwarting the statutory goals of the EIR process.” San Joaquin 
Raptor/Wildlife Rescue Center v. County of Stanislaus (1994) 27 Cal.App.4th 713, 722; Galante 
Vineyards v. Monterey Peninsula Water Mgmt. Dist. (1997) 60 Cal.App.4th 1109, 1117; County of 
Amador v. El Dorado Cnty. Water Agency (1999) 76 Cal. App. 4th 931, 946.)  
 
The lead agency must evaluate comments on the draft EIR and prepare written responses in the final 
EIR. (Pub. Res. Code § 21091(d).) The FEIR must include a “detailed” written response to all 
“significant environmental issues” raised by commenters. As the court stated in City of Long Beach v. 
LA USD (2009) 176 Cal.App.4th 889, 904,  
 
The requirement of a detailed written response to comments helps to ensure that the lead 
agency will fully consider the environmental consequences of a decision before it is made, 
that the decision is well informed and open to public scrutiny, and that public participation in 
the environmental review process is meaningful.  
 
The FEIR’s responses to comments must be detailed and must provide a reasoned, good faith 
analysis. (CEQA Guidelines § 15088(c).) Failure to provide a substantive response to comment 
render the EIR legally inadequate. (Rural Land Owners Assoc. v. City Council (1983) 143 Cal.App.3d 
1013, 1020.)  
 
The responses to comments on a draft EIR must state reasons for rejecting suggested mitigation 
measures and comments on significant environmental issues. “Conclusory statements unsupported by 
factual information” are not an adequate response. (CEQA Guidelines §§ 15088(b), (c); Cleary v. 
County of Stanislaus (1981) 118 Cal.App.3rd 348.) The need for a substantive, detailed response is 
particularly appropriate when comments have been raised by experts or other agencies. (Berkeley 
Keep Jets, 91 Cal.App.4th at 1367; People v. County of Kern (1976) 62 Cal.App.3d 761.) A reasoned 
analysis of the issue and references to supporting evidence are required for substantive comments 
raised. (Calif. Oak Found. v. Santa Clarita (2005) 133 Cal.App.4th 1219.) 
 
Response A.2: The City of San José prepared a First Amendment to the Draft EIR 
for the referenced project, which combined with the Draft EIR constitutes the Final 
EIR, in compliance with the requirements of CEQA and the CEQA Guidelines. As 
discussed in the previous responses and in responses to specific comments below, the 
comments raised by Lozeau Drury, LLP do not identify a new or more significant 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  3  City of San José – August 2021 
 impact, or a new feasible project alternative or mitigation measure considerably 
different than identified in the Draft EIR.  
 
Comment A.3: III. DISCUSSION 
A. The DEIR Fails to Discuss Indoor Air Quality Impacts Related to the Project. 
As stated in LIUNA’s DEIR Comment, the DEIR fails to discuss, disclose, analyze, and mitigate the 
significant health risks posed by the Project from formaldehyde, a toxic air contaminant (“TAC”). 
Certified Industrial Hygienist, Francis Offermann, PE, CIH, conducted a review of the Project, the 
DEIR, and relevant documents regarding the Project’s indoor air emissions. Mr. Offermann is one of 
the world’s leading experts on indoor air quality, in particular emissions of formaldehyde, and has 
published extensively on the topic. As set forth in Mr. Offermann’s comments, the Project’s 
emissions of formaldehyde to air will result in very significant cancer risks to future residents at the 
Project’s apartments. Mr. Offermann’s expert opinion demonstrated the Project’s significant health 
risk impacts, which the City has a duty to investigate, disclose, and mitigate in an EIR. Mr. 
Offermann’s DEIR comment and curriculum vitae are attached as Exhibit A to LIUNA’s DEIR 
Comment 
 
LIUNA’s DEIR Comment explained that formaldehyde is a known human carcinogen and listed by 
the State as a TAC. (LIUNA DEIR Comment, p. 4.) Mr. Offermann explained that many composite 
wood products typically used in home and apartment building construction contain formaldehyde-
based glues which off-gas formaldehyde over a very long time period. He stated, “The primary 
source of formaldehyde indoors is composite wood products manufactured with urea-formaldehyde 
resins, such as plywood, medium density fiberboard, and particle board. These materials are 
commonly used in residential, office, and retail building construction for flooring, cabinetry, 
baseboards, window shades, interior doors, and window and door trims.” (LIUNA DEIR Comment, 
Ex. A, pp. 2-3.) 
 
Mr. Offermann found that future residents of the Project’s residential units will be exposed to a 
cancer risk from formaldehyde of approximately 120 per million, even assuming that all materials 
are compliant with the California Air Resources Board’s formaldehyde airborne toxics control 
measure. (LIUNA DEIR Comment, Ex. A, pp. 4-5.) This is more than 12 times BAAQMD’s CEQA 
significance threshold of 10 per million. (Id.) 
 
Mr. Offermann found that future employees of the Project’s commercial spaces will be exposed to a 
cancer risk from formaldehyde of approximately 17.7 per million, even assuming that all materials 
are compliant with the California Air Resources Board’s formaldehyde airborne toxics control 
measure. (LIUNA DEIR Comment, Ex. A, p. 4.) This exceeds BAAQMD’s CEQA significance 
thresholds 10 per million. (Id.)  
 
In the FEIR, the City provided a number of responses to Mr. Offermann’s comments, none of which 
are sufficient. Mr. Offermann has reviewed the responses to his comments and prepared a reply 
(“Offermann Reply”). The Offermann Reply is attached hereto as Exhibit A.  
 
Response A.3: Refer to Responses A.4 to A.8 and A.13 to A.16, below. 
 
Comment A.4: First, the City criticized Mr. Offermann’s mistaken reference to the CEQA threshold 
set by the South Coast Air Quality management [sic] District (“SCAQMD”). Mr. Offermann 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  4  City of San José – August 2021 
 concedes that this was a typo, that he meant to reference the Bay Area Air Quality Management 
District (“BAAQMD”), and that the typo did not alter his analysis or conclusions. (Offermann Reply, 
pp. 1-2.) 
 
Response A.4: The commenter states that the City criticized their expert by notating 
his reference to the South Coast Air Quality Management District.  The referenced 
response is Response D.24, page 30 of the First Amendment, this response identifies 
the original reference was incorrect and not applicable to the project.  
 
Comment A.5: Second, the City claimed that there are no CEQA thresholds of significance for 
formaldehyde and that the Project would comply with CalGreen building standards, which 
incorporate the formaldehyde requirements of the California Air Resources Board (“CARB”). The 
CIty [sic] further claimed that any risk from formaldehyde emissions was merely speculative.  
 
Response A.5: The commenter suggests that “The City further claimed that any risk 
from formaldehyde emissions was merely speculative.” This is not an accurate 
statement with regard to the City’s response. In Response D.3 ,page 13, and Response 
D.25,page 37, of the First Amendment, the City specifically stated: 
 
“Lastly, even with the regulations in place, if materials containing 
formaldehyde were to be used, it would be speculative for the City to estimate 
the type and volume of building materials that may contain formaldehyde 
(emphasis added). Per Section 15145 of the CEQA guidelines, speculative 
analysis is not acceptable. Because there would be no way to quantify the off-
gassing of materials, and because no thresholds exist, no additional analysis 
or mitigation measures related to formaldehyde would be required.” 
 
Comment A.6: Mr. Offermann has replied, “the Bay Area Air Quality Management District 
(BAAQMD) does have an adopted CEQA threshold for formaldehyde and this includes the impacts 
from all aspects of a project including the impacts from the building construction materials on the 
indoor environment.” (Offermann Reply, p. 2.) Furthermore, Mr. Offermann reiterated that his 
analysis demonstrated that the Project presents a serious cancer risk even if the Project complies with 
CalGreen/CARB standards. (Id.) This is precisely why mitigation is needed beyond bare compliance 
with CalGreen/CARB standards. Also, Mr. Offermann stressed that the impact is not speculative but 
rather requires that the City take the extra step of requiring no-formaldehyde-added or ulta-low-
formaldehyde building materials. (Id.) 
 
Response A.6: The commenter contends that the proposed project would exceed the 
Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD) CEQA significance 
threshold of 10 cancer cases per million for interior formaldehyde exposure to future 
residents and employees. As was stated in the First Amendment to the Draft EIR 
(Response D.3 ,pages 12-13), BAAQMD does not have an adopted CEQA threshold 
for indoor formaldehyde and does not regulate indoor air quality. While the 
commenter continues to assert that BAAQMD does have an indoor formaldehyde 
threshold, they have provided no documentation or reference to show that the City is 
incorrect in their understanding of the BAAQMD CEQA Guidelines.   
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  5  City of San José – August 2021 
 The commenter asserts that formaldehyde is a toxic air contaminant (TAC). It can be 
presumed that the commenter is applying the BAAQMD exterior source TAC 
threshold of 10 cancer cases per million to indoor formaldehyde emissions. While 
BAAQMD does also identify formaldehyde as a TAC, the BAAQMD CEQA 
Guidelines only identify mobile source formaldehyde emissions as TACs. This is 
different than the indoor source emissions cited by the commenter.  As such, and 
because BAAQMD does not regulate indoor air quality, the TAC threshold cited by 
the commenter is not applicable. The City maintains, BAAQMD does not have an 
indoor formaldehyde emissions threshold. 
 
Furthermore, there is no way to reasonably estimate the quantity of materials that 
may off-gas or what the total interior emissions would be per residential unit or retail 
space as the building interiors have not been designed or materials chosen. For all 
these reasons, the City cannot quantify with reasonable certainty the emission levels 
as there is no adopted threshold by which to identify an impact.  
 
Comment A.7: Third, the City makes a legal argument that it was not required to analyze the impact 
of the Project’s formaldehyde emissions on the Project’s workers because such impacts do not need 
to be considered under CEQA. This argument is contrary to the California Supreme Court’s decision 
in California Building Industry Ass’n v. Bay Area Air Quality Mgmt. Dist. (2015) 62 Cal.4th 369, 386 
(“CBIA”). In that case, the Supreme Court expressly holds that potential adverse impacts to future 
users and residents from pollution generated by a proposed project must be addressed under 
CEQA. At issue in CBIA was whether the Air District could enact CEQA guidelines that advised lead 
agencies that they must analyze the impacts of adjacent environmental conditions on a project. The 
Supreme Court held that CEQA does not generally require lead agencies to consider the 
environment’s effects on a project. (CBIA, 62 Cal.4th at 800-01.) However, to the extent a project 
may exacerbate existing environmental conditions at or near a project site, those would still have to 
be considered pursuant to CEQA. (Id. at 801.) In so holding, the Court expressly held that CEQA’s 
statutory language required lead agencies to disclose and analyze “impacts on a project’s users or 
residents that arise from the project’s effects on the environment.” (Id. at 800 [emphasis added].) 
 
The carcinogenic formaldehyde emissions identified by Mr. Offermann are not an existing 
environmental condition. Those emissions to the air will be from the Project. People will be residing 
in and using the Project once it is built and begins emitting formaldehyde. Once built, the Project will 
begin to emit formaldehyde at levels that pose significant direct and cumulative health risks. The 
Supreme Court in CBIA expressly finds that this type of air emission and health impact by the project 
on the environment and a “project’s users and residents” must be addressed in the CEQA process. 
The existing TAC sources near the Project site would have to be considered in evaluating the 
cumulative effect on future residents of both the Project’s TAC emissions as well as those existing 
off-site emissions.  
 
Response A.7: The commenter notes above that “to the extent a project may 
exacerbate existing environmental conditions at or near a project site, those would 
still have to be considered pursuant to CEQA. (Id. at 801.) In so holding, the Court 
expressly held that CEQA’s statutory language required lead agencies to disclose and 
analyze ’impacts on a project’s users or residents that arise from the project’s effects 
on the environment.” (Id. at 800 [emphasis added].)” Then further states that “The 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  6  City of San José – August 2021 
 carcinogenic formaldehyde emissions identified by Mr. Offerman are not an existing 
environmental condition.” 
 
The commenter is correct that the CBIA decision states that CEQA does apply to 
certain airport, school, and housing construction projects. The decision states “The 
environmental review must take into account – and a negative declaration or 
exemption cannot issue without considering – how existing environmental risks such 
as noise, hazardous waste, or wildland fire hazard will impact future residents or 
users of a project.” Throughout the decision the Court was clear that the 
circumstances by which CEQA should assess the environments impact on a project 
are the result of the project exacerbating an existing condition.  Because there is no 
existing formaldehyde condition as confirmed by the commenter, the City is correct 
in stating that there is no requirement to analyze the impact of the project’s 
formaldehyde emissions on future site workers because such impacts do not need to 
be considered under CEQA. The potential effects of existing cumulative exterior 
TAC emissions on future site users were addressed in the Draft EIR in Section 3.3.3 
,page 46. 
 
Comment A.8: The Supreme Court’s reasoning is well-grounded in CEQA’s statutory language. 
CEQA expressly includes a project’s effects on human beings as an effect on the environment that 
must be addressed in an environmental review. “Section 21083(b)(3)’s express language, for 
example, requires a finding of a ‘significant effect on the environment’ (§ 21083(b)) whenever the 
‘environmental effects of a project will cause substantial adverse effects on human beings, either 
directly or indirectly.’” (CBIA, 62 Cal.4th at 800 [emphasis in original].) Likewise, “the Legislature 
has made clear—in declarations accompanying CEQA’s enactment—that public health and safety are 
of great importance in the statutory scheme.” (Id., citing e.g., PRC §§ 21000, subds. (b), (c), (d), (g), 
21001, subds. (b), (d).) It goes without saying that the thousands of future residents at the Project are 
human beings and the health and safety of those residents must be subjected to CEQA’s safeguards. 
 
The City has a duty to investigate issues relating to a project’s potential environmental impacts. (See 
County Sanitation Dist. No. 2 v. County of Kern (2005) 127 Cal.App.4th 1544, 1597–98. [“[U]nder 
CEQA, the lead agency bears a burden to investigate potential environmental impacts.”].) The 
proposed Project will have significant impacts on air quality and health risks by emitting cancer-
causing levels of formaldehyde into the air that will expose future workers to cancer risks potentially 
in excess of BAAQMD’s threshold of significance for cancer health risks of 10 in a million. The City 
must analyze the health risks posed by the Project’s formaldehyde emissions in a revised EIR in 
order to properly disclose and mitigate this impact. 
 
Response A.8: See Responses A.6 and A.7 above. 
 
Comment A.9: B. The EIR’s Analysis of Annual Operational Emissions Remains Incorrect 
LIUNA’s DEIR Comment included the expert analysis of Matt Hagemann, P.G., C.Hg., and Paul E. 
Rosenfeld, Ph.D., of the Soil/Water/Air Protection Enterprise (“SWAPE”). SWAPE has reviewed the 
FEIR’s response to their comment and prepared a reply (“SWAPE Reply”). SWAPE’s Reply found 
that find the [sic] DEIR and FEIR remain inadequate and that the conclusions regarding the Project’s 
air quality impacts are unsubstantiated. SWAPE’s Reply is attached hereto as Exhibit B. 
 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  7  City of San José – August 2021 
 SWAPE’s DEIR Comment noted that the DEIR’s CalEEMod annual output files provide annual 
average emissions estimates in tons per year (“tons/year”), while the CalEEMod winter and summer 
output files provide daily maximum emissions estimates in pounds per day (“lbs/day”). (SWAPE 
Reply, p. 2.) In contrast, the BAAQMD significance thresholds evaluate average daily emissions and 
maximum annual emissions. (Id.)  
 
As such, the DEIR and FEIR should have converted the Project’s daily maximum emissions 
estimates, provided in the summer and winter CalEEMod output files, from lbs/day to tons/year in 
order to evaluate the Project’s annual maximum operational emissions based on the corresponding 
BAAQMD significance thresholds. (SWAPE Reply, p. 2.) Thus, the EIR is inconsistent with 
BAAQMD guidance and underestimates the Project’s maximum annual operational emissions. (Id.) 
As a result, the EIR’s conclusions as to the significance of the Project’ air quality impacts, cannot be 
relied upon. (Id.) 
 
Response A.9: As explained in Response D.27, page 40 of the First Amendment, 
BAAQMD interprets the “maximum annual emissions” to be calculated by 
computing the average daily emissions then converting it to annual emissions. The 
approach used by the commenter is misleading as it overestimates the project 
emissions by taking the maximum daily emission and applying that for the whole 
year to get the annual emissions.  This is not realistic as the maximum daily 
emissions would not occur every day of the year. This is why the BAAQMD 
guidance is to use the average daily emissions which is a more realistic estimate to 
calculate the annual emissions.  
 
Comment A.10: C. The EIR Relies on Unsubstantiated Input Parameters to Estimate Project 
Emissions and Thus Fails to Provide Substantial Evidence of the Project’s Air Quality Impacts. 
SWAPE’s DEIR Comment identified numerous shortcomings in the DEIR’s air quality model due to 
artificial reductions in the Project’s construction and operational emissions. (SWAPE Reply, p. 2.) 
After reviewing the FEIR, SWAPE still concludes that several input parameters used to calculate the 
Project’s air quality impacts [sic] 
 
SWAPE’s DEIR Comment found that the DEIR’s air model increased the default value for the 
grading phase length from a default value of 8 days to 24 days for Phase 1 and from a default value 
of 6 days to 24 days for Phase 2. (LIUNA DEIR Comment, Ex. B, pp. 7-8.) However, the DEIR 
claimed that the Project’s construction schedule would be based on CalEEMod default information 
and did not make any specific mention of the length of the grading phase for construction. (Id. Ex. B, 
pp. 8-9; DEIR, p. 39.) This unsubstantiated increase in grading phase is important because an 
improper increase in phase length improperly spreads out estimated construction emissions over a 
longer period of time, resulting in an underestimation of the Project’s emissions. (Id. Ex. B, p. 9.)  
 
In the FEIR’s Responses to Comments, the City claimed that “[u]sing the default CalEEMod 
assumptions would have underestimated the construction emissions associated with grading, which 
would have led to underestimates for total emissions.” (SWAPE Reply, p. 3.) However, SWAPE 
notes that this reasoning is faulty because “utilizing a longer period of time for the grading phase 
length spreads out construction emissions over more days, thus resulting in underestimated 
emissions estimates per each day of construction.” (Id.) As such, the FEIR’s Response to Comments 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  8  City of San José – August 2021 
 is inadequate and SWAPE maintains that the EIR’s air model cannot be relied upon to determine the 
significance of the Project’s air quality impacts.  
 
Response A.10: Response D.9, page 17, of the First Amendment stated: 
 
“The Air Quality Analysis for the Draft EIR used a longer grading period 
than the default value to account for the project’s excavation of up to 14 feet 
in depth. Using the default CalEEMod assumptions would have 
underestimated the construction emissions associated with grading, which 
would have led to underestimates for total emissions that are used to compute 
daily emissions and the overall dosage of toxic air contaminants (TACs) used 
in the health risk assessment and the amount of PM2.5 emitted to compute the 
annual concentration of PM2.5. Since grading is the most intensive phase, an 
underestimate of the grading period would lead to an underestimate of 
average daily emissions. Therefore, the conclusions of the Draft EIR with the 
extended grading period accounted for are correct and no revisions to or 
recirculation of the DEIR are required.” 
 
To put it another way, the total excavation required for the project could not 
be reasonably completed within the default values of eight days and six days. 
As such, the inputs had to be modified to accurately account for the time 
needed to reasonably excavate up to 14 feet in depth and grade the entire site.  
If the defaults had been used, they could not have accounted for the entirety 
of the earthwork required for the project and would have underestimated the 
emissions.   
 
Comment A.11: Similarly, the FEIR’s response to SWAPE’s concerns about operational vehicle trip 
rates is inadequate. SWAPE’s DEIR Comment found that the DEIR’s air model underestimated the 
number of daily vehicle trip rates during operation of the Project. (LIUNA DEIR Comment, Ex. B, p. 
9.) According to the DEIR, the Project’s proposed land uses are expected to generate approximately 
1,289 average daily vehicle trips (DEIR, p. 179.) However, the air model underestimated the 
weekday, Saturday, and Sunday trips by approximately 137, 189, and 450 trips, respectively. 
(LIUNA DEIR Comment, Ex. B, p. 9.) SWAPE also found that the air model overestimated the 
existing vehicle trip rate. By underestimating operational vehicle trip rates and overestimating 
existing vehicle trip rates, the DEIR underestimated the net change in mobile-source operational 
emissions. (Id., Ex. B, pp. 9-10.)  
 
In the FEIR’s Responses to Comments, the City claimed that “[t]he number of weekday trips used is 
consistent with the project Transportation Analysis which determined the net project trips would be 
1,130.” (SWAPE Reply, p. 3.) However, SWAPE’s review of the Project’s Transportation Analysis 
(“TA”), provided as Appendix H to the DEIR, found that the TA fails to specify that the trip 
generation rates are associated with weekdays. (Id. at p. 4.) Therefore, the EIR “should have utilized 
the same number of Saturday and Sunday vehicle trips as weekday vehicle trips, and the FEIR’s 
claims are unsubstantiated.” (Id.) As such, the FEIR’s Response to Comments is inadequate and 
SWAPE maintains that the EIR’s air model cannot be relied upon to determine the significance of the 
Project’s air quality impacts. 
 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  9  City of San José – August 2021 
 Response A.11: As explained on page 13 of Appendix H of the Draft EIR, the local 
transportation assessment (LTA) includes an evaluation of weekday AM and PM 
peak hour operations. Traffic conditions at the study intersections were analyzed for 
both the weekday AM and PM peak hours. The trip generation estimates correlate to 
this analysis and are based on weekday trip rates consistent with standard traffic 
methodologies. As discussed in Response D.10, page 18 and D.33, page 48 of the 
First Amendment, the Air Quality Analysis for the Draft EIR used the correct trip 
generation rates for the proposed project. The number of weekday trips used is 
consistent with the project Transportation Analysis which determined the net project 
trips would be 1,130. As described in the Air Quality Analysis, the weekday rates 
were adjusted for Saturday and Sundays per the ratios assigned by CalEEMod, as the 
traffic analysis does not provide estimates for weekends or holidays. The commenter 
uses the wrong square footages when combining existing commercial and residential 
uses on-site. Their calculation for existing uses ignores the existing eight residential 
units on-site that contribute to the existing square footages used to generate the 
existing land use trips used in the Transportation Analysis and Air Quality Analysis 
for the Draft EIR. The Air Quality Analysis and Transportation Analysis for the Draft 
EIR used the correct trip generation rates for both existing and proposed land uses. 
The correct square footages for existing uses were also used. Therefore, the 
conclusions of the Draft EIR are correct, and no revisions are required. 
 
Comment A.12: IV. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, LIUNA respectfully requests that the Planning Commission refrain from 
recommending approval of the Project and certification of the FEIR to the City Council until the 
concerns discussed above are address [sic] in a revised EIR. 
 
Response A.12: The City notes that this comment letter was provided to the Planning 
Commission on the day of the Planning Commission hearing for the referenced 
project and was not directly provided to the City Planning staff by the commenter. 
Planning staff and the City Attorney’s Office were provided a copy of the letter by 
the Planning Commission and, while not required under CEQA, staff provided oral 
responses to the main points of the letter at the hearing. This written response has 
been provided as a courtesy and is also not required under CEQA. Planning 
Commission had no questions pertaining to the contents of this letter and voted to 
recommend approval of the project to the City Council.  
 
EXHIBIT A – MEMO FROM INDOOR ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING 
 
Comment A.13: The following are my rebuttal comments to the responses in the 1st Amendment to 
the Draft DEIR [sic], July, 2021 to the comments contained in my February 8, 2021 Indoor Air 
Quality Letter for 1530-1536 West San Carlos Mixed Use Project, San Jose, CA (attached here in 
Appendix A).  
 
Response D.24. The South Coast Air Quality Management District has no jurisdiction in Santa Clara 
County. The South Coast Air Quality Management District covers Los Angeles, Orange, San 
Bernardino, and Riverside counties. Santa Clara County is under the jurisdiction of the Bay Area Air 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  10  City of San José – August 2021 
 Quality Management District (BAAQMD), which does not have an adopted CEQA threshold for 
formaldehyde from indoor building sources. Additionally, refer to Response D.3 and D.25. 
 
Rebuttal to Response D.24. In my February 8, 2021 Indoor Air Quality Letter, I stated on page 2 the 
following. “Therefore, the cancer risk of a resident living in a California home with the median 
indoor formaldehyde concentration of 36 μg/m3, is 180 per million as a result of formaldehyde alone. 
The CEQA significance threshold for airborne cancer risk is 10 per million, as established by the 
South Coast Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD, 2017).” Yes, it is true that the South 
Coast Air Quality Management District has no jurisdiction in Santa Clara County where the West 
San Carlos Mixed Use Project is located. This was a typo. The following text in this comment, “as 
established by the South Coast Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD, 2017)” should have 
stated “as established by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD, 2017)”. 
 
In addition, Response D.24 is incorrect, the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD) 
does have an adopted CEQA threshold for formaldehyde and this includes the impacts from all 
aspects of a project including the impacts from the building construction materials on the indoor 
environment. 
 
Response A.13: See Response A.6, above. 
 
Comment A.14: Response D.25: BAAQMD does not have thresholds for indoor formaldehyde 
exposure. While BAAQMD recognizes formaldehyde as an outdoor TAC from automobile and truck 
exhaust, the BAAQMD CEQA guidelines do not define a specific threshold for formaldehyde or 
regulate indoor air quality. The California Supreme Court in a December 2015 opinion (California 
Building Industry Association v. Bay Area Air Quality Management District) confirmed that CEQA, 
with several specific exceptions, is concerned with the impacts of a project on the environment, not 
the effects the existing environment may have on a project. The proposed project would be built in 
accordance with the most recent California Green Building Code (CALGreen), which specifies that 
composite wood products (such as hardwood plywood and particleboard) meet the requirements for 
formaldehyde as specified in the California Air Resources Board’s (CARBs) Air Toxic Control 
Measures. In addition, the project would be required to comply with the City’s Green Building 
Ordinance (Policy 6-32) and would be designed to achieve minimum LEED certification. LEED 
certification will require measures to improve indoor air quality. Furthermore, the commenter is 
speculating in the assertion that composite wood materials would be used in the interior of the 
building. Indoor building materials will not be known until the building permit stage and, as stated 
above, these materials will be required to comply with CARB, the 2019 CalGreen building code, and 
LEED certification requirements. Lastly, even with the regulations in place, if materials containing 
formaldehyde were to be used, it would be speculative for the City to estimate the type and volume 
of building materials that may contain formaldehyde. Per Section 15145 of the CEQA guidelines, 
speculative analysis is not acceptable. Because there would be no way to quantify the off-gassing of 
materials, and because no thresholds exist, no additional analysis or mitigation measures related to 
formaldehyde would be required. This comment does not raise any issues that would require 
recirculation of the DEIR or inclusion of additional mitigation measures.  
 
Rebuttal to Response D.25: It is correct that CEQA is concerned with the impacts of a project on the 
environment, and that is exactly what my comment addresses. If this project is constructed with 
composite wood products that contain resins such as urea-formaldehyde resins or other resins that 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  11  City of San José – August 2021 
 emit formaldehyde, then the project creates an impact on the environment, in this case the indoor 
environment.  
 
Response A.14: As stated in the CEQA Guidelines Section 15360, “Environment” 
means the physical conditions which exist within the area which will be affected by a 
proposed project including land, air, water, minerals, flora, fauna, ambient noise, and 
objects of historical or aesthetic significance. The area involved shall be the area in 
which significant effects would occur either directly or indirectly as a result of the 
project. The “environment” includes both natural and man-made conditions. 
Therefore, CEQA does not define the environment as the indoor environment of a 
proposed project. Furthermore, a project cannot impact itself or by extension its own 
occupants. The environment, as defined by CEQA and outlined above, is the existing 
natural and man-made physical environment.  
 
Comment A.15: With respect to the response that the project will use materials that will comply 
with CARB ATCM and the 2019 CalGreen building code, as I illustrated in Appendix A “
Indoor 
comply with the CARB ATCM 
Formaldehyde Concentrations and the CARB Formaldehyde ATCM” of my February 8, 2021 
and the 2019 CalGreen building code which references the CARB ATCM, does not ensure that the 
Indoor Air Quality Letter, use of composite wood products that 
resulting indoor formaldehyde concentrations will not 
exceed the CEQA cancer risk of 10 per 
million. Even composite wood products manufactured with CARB certified ultra low emitting 
formaldehyde (ULEF) resins do not ensure that the indoor air will have concentrations of 
formaldehyde the meet the OEHHA cancer risks that substantially exceed 10 per million.  
 
Further, we are not asking that the builder “speculate” on what type and how much composite 
materials be used, but rather to commit to the following. At the design stage select composite 
wood materials based on the formaldehyde emission rates that manufacturers routinely 
conduct using the California Department of Health “Standard Method for the Testing and 
Evaluation of Volatile Organic Chemical Emissions for Indoor Sources Using Environmental 
Chambers,” (CDPH, 2017), and use the Pre- Construction Building Material/Furnishing 
Formaldehyde Emissions Assessment (contained in Appendix A of my February 8, 2021 Indoor 
Air Quality Letter) to ensure that the materials selected achieve acceptable cancer risks from 
 
material off gassing of formaldehyde.  
Response A.15: Refer to Response A.6, above. 
 
Response A.15: The materials the builder chooses to utilize at the design stage 
cannot be dictated through mitigation as there is no nexus for the City as the Lead 
Agency to do so. This comment does not raise any specific issues about the adequacy 
of the Draft EIR or notate specific concerns with regard to the analysis. 
 
Comment A.16: With respect to the response that the project “would be designed to achieve 
 
minimum LEED certification”, this certification does not ensure that the resulting indoor 
formaldehyde concentrations will not 
exceed the CEQA cancer risk of 10 per million. The LEED EQ 
Credit Low-Emitting Materials requires that composite wood products meet the CARB ATCM 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  12  City of San José – August 2021 
requirements for ULEF or NAF materials. As indicated above, ULEF composite wood products 
 (which have formaldehyde emission rates that are only 11-15% lower than the CARB Phase 2 
emission rates) do not ensure that the CEQA cancer risk of 10 per million is met. Only use of all 
NAF composite wood products can ensure that the CEQA cancer risk of 10 per million is met.  
 
The LEED EQ Credit Indoor Air Quality Assessment requires that the indoor formaldehyde 
3
concentration not exceed 27 ppb (i.e., 33 μg/m ), which does not ensure that the CEQA cancer 
risk of 10 per million is met. As shown in my February 8, 2021 Indoor Air Quality Letter, for a 
3 
residential formaldehyde exposure to 24.1 μg/m the cancer risk is 120 per million, which is 
more than 12 times the CEQA cancer risk of 10 per million. So for a residential exposure with 
3
the LEED maximum allowable formaldehyde concentration of 33 μg/m , the cancer risk is 134 
per million, which is more than 13 times the CEQA cancer risk of 10 per million.  
 
Alternatively, and perhaps a simpler approach, is to only use composite wood products (e.g. 
hardwood plywood, medium density fiberboard, particleboard) for all interior finish systems 
that are made with CARB approved no-added formaldehyde (NAF) resins such as resins made 
from soy, polyvinyl acetate, or methylene diisocyanate.  
Note that this Rebuttal to Response D.25 also applies to the Response D.3. 
 
 
Response A.16: Refer to Response A.15, above. 
 
EXHIBIT B – MEMO FROM SWAPE 
 
Comment A.17: We have reviewed the Final Environmental Impact Report (“FEIR”) for the 1530-
1544 West San Carlos Mixed-Use Project (“Project”) located in the City of San Jose (“City”). After 
our review of the FEIR, we find that the FEIR is insufficient in addressing our concerns regarding the 
Project’s air quality impacts. As we asserted in our February 16th comment letter, an updated EIR 
should be prepared to adequately evaluate the Project’s potential impacts. 
 
Air Quality Incorrect Analysis of Annual Operational Emissions  
In our February 16th comment letter, we identified the DEIR’s incorrect analysis of the Project’s 
annual operational emissions. Review of the FEIR demonstrates that the Project again fails to justify 
or correct this error. As discussed below, we find the DEIR and FEIR to be inadequate and maintain 
that the air quality impact significance determination is unsubstantiated. Regarding the incorrect 
analysis of annual operational emissions, the FEIR states: “The commenter uses an incorrect method 
and includes emission sources that would not be part of the project such as fireplaces to inflate the 
maximum daily emissions that were then used to compute annual emissions. The commenter’s 
computation of using maximum daily emissions with fireplaces that are not allowed to calculate their 
theoretical maximum annual emissions is not realistic and does not follow the intended threshold” (p. 
20). 
 
After review of the FEIR, we agree that the Project would not include wood-burning fireplaces. 
However, the FEIR’s computation of the Project’s annual maximum emissions remains incorrect. As 
previously stated in our February 16th comment letter, the CalEEMod annual output files provide 
annual average emissions estimates in tons per year (“tons/year”), while the CalEEMod winter and 
summer output files provide daily maximum emissions estimates in pounds per day (“lbs/day”). In 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  13  City of San José – August 2021 
 contrast, the BAAQMD significance thresholds evaluate average daily emissions and maximum 
annual emissions (see excerpt below). 
 
 
Thus, the DEIR and FEIR should have converted the Project’s daily maximum emissions estimates, 
provided in the summer and winter CalEEMod output files, from lbs/day to tons/year in order to 
evaluate the Project’s annual maximum operational emissions based on the corresponding BAAQMD 
significance thresholds. However, as discussed in our February 16th comment letter, the DEIR is 
inconsistent with BAAQMD guidance and underestimates the Project’s maximum annual operational 
emissions. As a result, we reiterate our February 16th comment that the DEIR’s air quality analysis 
should not be relied upon to determine Project significance.  
 
Response A.17: Refer to Response A.9, above. 
 
Comment A.18: Unsubstantiated Input Parameters Used to Estimate Project Emissions  
In our February 16th comment letter, we identified several issues with the DEIR’s air model 
(California Emissions Estimator Model, “CalEEMod”) that artificially reduced the Project’s 
construction and operational emissions. After review of the FEIR, we found that the FEIR fails to 
address all our concerns and maintain that the DEIR’s CalEEMod model is flawed and fails to 
accurately estimate the Project’s criteria air pollutant emissions. As such, we find the DEIR and 
FEIR to be inadequate and maintain that an updated FEIR should be prepared to adequately evaluate 
the Project’s local and regional air quality impacts. Until a proper air quality analysis is conducted, 
the Project should not be approved. 
 
Response A.18: This comment does not raise any specific issues about the adequacy 
of the Draft EIR or notate specific concerns with regard to the analysis. 
 
Comment A.19: Overestimated Existing Land Use Sizes  
As discussed in our February 16th comment letter, the “19-066 1530-1536 W. San Carlos (Existing 
Land Use)” CalEEMod model included overestimated land use sizes associated with the existing site. 
Review of the FEIR demonstrates that this comment was entirely unaddressed, and the Project fails 
to justify or correct this modeling error. As such, we find the DEIR and FEIR to be inadequate and 
maintain that the air quality impact significance determination is unsubstantiated.  
 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  14  City of San José – August 2021 
 Response A.19: The comment was addressed in Response D.29, page 42, of the First 
Amendment.  Specifically, the response states:  
 
“The commenter is misrepresenting the information provided in the Draft EIR. As 
stated on page 3 of the Draft EIR:  
 
“The project site is currently developed with three commercial buildings 
(totaling approximately 7,600 square feet), currently used for automotive 
businesses, a martial arts studio, and a restaurant, and associated ancillary 
structures and surface parking. Behind the restaurant building, and separated 
by a metal rolling gate, are eight single-family residences and three ancillary 
parking garages in the southern portion of the site.”  
 
The commenter fails to acknowledge the eight residential units and square footage 
on-site. As shown in the excerpted table above, the table lists the square footages for 
a high turnover sit down restaurant, single-family housing, and automobile care 
center. The total square footage for all commercial space as shown in the table is 
7,597 and the total residential square footage is 5,500, for a total of 13,097 square 
feet. The commenter appears to have added the “single family housing” square 
footage in the table for the residential units to the commercial square footage 
calculation to say the existing building surface area was “overestimated by 5,497 
square feet.” The square footages shown in the table correctly represent the existing 
land uses onsite. Therefore, the modeling is correct. The comment does not identify a 
new or more significant impact, or a new feasible project alternative or mitigation 
measure considerably different than identified in the Draft EIR. For these reasons, the 
Draft EIR does not require recirculation.” 
 
Comment A.20: Unsubstantiated Change to Individual Construction Phase Length  
As discussed in our February 16th comment letter, the DEIR’s “19-066 W. San Carlos (Phase 1) 
Construction AQ,” “19-066 W. San Carlos (Phase 1) Construction TAC,” and “19-066 W. San 
Carlos (Phase 2) Construction AQ” CalEEMod models included an unsubstantiated change to the 
default grading phase length. Review of the FEIR demonstrates that the Project again fails to justify 
or correct this modeling error. As discussed below, we find the DEIR and FEIR to be inadequate and 
maintain that the air quality impact significance determination is unsubstantiated. Specifically, 
regarding the change to the default grading phase length, the FEIR states: “Using the default 
CalEEMod assumptions would have underestimated the construction emissions associated with 
grading, which would have led to underestimates for total emissions that are used to compute daily 
emissions and the overall dosage of toxic air contaminants (TACs) used in the health risk assessment 
and the amount of PM2.5 emitted to compute the annual concentration of PM2.5. Since grading is the 
most intensive phase, an underestimate of the grading period would lead to an underestimate of 
average daily emissions. Therefore, the conclusions of the Draft EIR with the extended grading 
period accounted for are correct and no revisions to or recirculation of the DEIR are required” (p. 
17). As demonstrated above, the FEIR claims that utilizing a longer grading phase length results in 
an overestimation of emissions. However, this is incorrect, as utilizing a longer period of time for the 
grading phase length spreads out construction emissions over more days, thus resulting in 
underestimated emissions estimates per each day of construction. As such, the FEIR’s response is 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  15  City of San José – August 2021 
 inadequate, and we reiterate our February 16th comment that the DEIR’s CalEEMod model should 
not be relied upon to determine Project significance. 
 
Response A.20: See Response A.10, above. 
 
Comment A.21: Use of Incorrect Operational Vehicle Trip Rates  
As discussed in our February 16th comment letter, the DEIR’s “19-066 1530-1536-1544 W. San 
Carlos Operational & GHG” and “19-066 1530-1536-1544 W. San Carlos Operational & GHG 
2030” CalEEMod models included incorrect operational vehicle trip rates. Review of the FEIR 
demonstrates that the Project again fails to justify or correct this modeling error. As discussed below, 
we find the DEIR and FEIR to be inadequate and maintain that the air quality impact significance 
determination is unsubstantiated.  
 
Specifically, regarding the incorrect operational vehicle trip rates, the FEIR states:  
 
“The number of weekday trips used is consistent with the project Transportation Analysis 
which determined the net project trips would be 1,130. As described in the Air Quality 
Analysis, the 4 weekday rates were adjusted for Saturday and Sundays per the ratios assigned 
by CalEEMod, as the traffic analysis does not provide estimates for weekends or holidays” 
(p. 18).  
 
However, review of the 1530-1544 W. San Carlos Street Mixed-Use Development Transportation 
Analysis (“TA”), provided as Appendix H to the DEIR, demonstrates that the TA fails to specify that 
the trip generation rates are associated with weekdays. Specifically, the TA states: 
 
“After applying the ITE trip rates, appropriate trip reductions, and existing site trip credits, it 
is estimated that the project would generate an additional 1,130 daily vehicle trips, with 64 
trips (22 inbound and 42 outbound) occurring during the AM peak hour and 93 trips (53 
inbound and 41 outbound) occurring during the PM peak hour” (p. 30).  
 
As demonstrated above, the TA fails to indicate that the Project trip generation estimates apply only 
to weekdays, as claimed in the FEIR. Thus, the DEIR and FEIR should have utilized the same 
number of Saturday and Sunday vehicle trips as weekday vehicle trips, and the FEIR’s claims are 
unsubstantiated. As such, the FEIR’s response is inadequate, and we reiterate our February 16th 
comment that the DEIR’s CalEEMod model should not be relied upon to determine Project 
significance. 
 
Response A.21: Refer to Response A.11, above. 
 
Comment A.22: Disclaimer 
SWAPE has received limited discovery regarding this project. Additional information may become 
available in the future; thus, we retain the right to revise or amend this report when additional 
information becomes available. Our professional services have been performed using that degree of 
care and skill ordinarily exercised, under similar circumstances, by reputable environmental 
consultants practicing in this or similar localities at the time of service. No other warranty, expressed 
or implied, is made as to the scope of work, work methodologies and protocols, site conditions, 
analytical testing results, and findings presented. This report reflects efforts which were limited to 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  16  City of San José – August 2021 
 information that was reasonably accessible at the time of the work, and may contain informational 
gaps, inconsistencies, or otherwise be incomplete due to the unavailability or uncertainty of 
information obtained or provided by third parties. 
 
Response A.22: This comment does not address the adequacy of the Draft EIR or 
responses to comments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1530-1544 West San Carlos Mixed Use  17  City of San José – August 2021 
 PLANNING COMMISSION AGENDA:  7-14-21 
ITEM:  5.a. 
 
 
TO:  PLANNING COMMISSION  FROM:  Christopher Burton 
SUBJECT:  File No. SP20-004  DATE:  July 14, 2021 
                        ____________ 
COUNCIL DISTRICT: 6 
 
Type of Permit  Special Use Permit 
Proposed Land Use  Mixed Use Residential and Commercial Retail 
New Square Footage   288,926 square feet 
No. of Residential Units   173 units 
Demolition   Three existing commercial buildings, eight residential 
buildings, associated service structures, and one billboard  
Tree Removals   15 trees (11 ordinance-size, 4 non-ordinance-size) 
Project Planner   Alec Atienza 
CEQA Clearance   West San Carlos Street Mixed-Use Project Environmental 
Impact Report 
CEQA Planner   Maira Blanco 
 
 RECOMMENDATION   
Staff recommends that the Planning Commission recommend that the City Council take all of the following 
actions: 
1.  Adopt a Resolution certifying the West San Carlos Street Mixed-Use Project Environmental Impact 
Report, and making certain findings concerning significant impacts, mitigation measures, alternatives, 
and adopting a statement of overriding considerations and a related Mitigation Monitoring and 
Reporting Plan, in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).  
2.  Adopt a Resolution approving, subject to conditions, a Special Use Permit and Site Development Permit 
to allow the demolition of three existing commercial buildings, eight residential buildings, and 
associated service structures totaling approximately 14,131 square feet, the removal of 15 trees (11 
ordinance-size, four non-ordinance-size) for the construction of two seven-story residential mixed use 
buildings, including 173 residential units and 17,836 square feet of commercial retail space with a 42 
percent parking reduction on an approximately 1.34-gross acre site. 
 
 
 
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 2 of 24 
 
PROPERTY INFORMATION   
Location  Southeast corner of West San Carlos Street and Buena Vista Avenue 
(1530-1544 West San Carlos Street) 
Assessor Parcel No.  277-18-018, 277-18-019, 277-18-020  
General Plan  Urban Village 
Growth Area  West San Carlos Urban Village 
Zoning   CP Commercial Pedestrian and R-M Multiple Residence  
Historic Resources  Eight residential structures located at 1530 West San Carlos Street are 
eligible City Landmarks 
Annexation Date  February 5, 1960 (Sunol No. 12) 
Council District  6 
Acreage  1.34 gross acres 
Proposed Density  129 Dwelling Units/Acre 
Allowed Density  250 Dwelling Units/Acre 
 PROJECT SETTING AND BACKGROUND   
As shown on the attached Aerial Map (Figure 1), the subject site is comprised of three contiguous lots 
located on the southeast corner of West San Carlos Street and Buena Vista Avenue. The site is bordered by 
West San Carlos Street and multifamily housing to the north, a commercial retail building and multifamily 
housing to the east, single-family and multifamily residences to the south, and a restaurant to the west.  
 
Figure 1 Aerial Map 
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 3 of 24 
 
 
SURROUNDING USES  
  General Plan  Zoning District  Existing Use 
A (PD) Planned 
Development Zoning 
North  Urban Village  Multifamily residential 
District (File No. PDC02-
012) 
Urban Village & Mixed Use  Single-family & Multifamily 
South  R-M Multiple Residence  
Neighborhood  residential 
CN Commercial  Commercial Retail Building, 
East  Urban Village   Neighborhood & R-M  Single-family & Multifamily 
Multiple Residence  residential  
West  Urban Village  CP Commercial Pedestrian  Restaurant  
 
On April 29, 2019, the applicant, Viji Mani, submitted a Special Use Permit to allow the demolition of three 
existing commercial buildings, eight unoccupied residential buildings, associated service structures, and 
one billboard totaling 14,131 square feet, the removal of 15 trees (11 ordinance-size, four non-ordinance-
size) and to allow the construction of two seven-story mixed use buildings with one level of below-ground 
parking, including 173 residential units and 17,836 square feet of commercial retail space with an 
approximately 42 percent parking reduction on an approximately 1.34-gross acre site.  
The applicant originally submitted the project as a Planned Development Rezoning and a Planned 
Development Permit. However, the project was converted to a Special Use Permit because zoning 
consistency with the General Plan is not required for certain specified types of residential and mixed-use 
projects under State Law Assembly Bill 3194, an amendment to the Housing Accountability Act 
Amendment, which became effective on January 1, 2019. Per AB 3194, “mixed-use developments 
consisting of residential and nonresidential uses with at least two-thirds of the square footage designated 
for residential use can proceed if it complies with CEQA and “is consistent with the objective general plan 
standards and criteria.” (Government Code sections 65589.5(h)(2)(B) and 65589.5(j)(4)). The total square 
footage of the project is approximately 288,520 square feet, of which approximately 17,836 square feet 
would consist of commercial space. Therefore at least two-thirds of the square footage of the mixed-use 
project would be dedicated to residential space. The site has a General Plan Land Use Designation of Urban 
Village and is located in both the CP Commercial Pedestrian and R-M Multiple Residence Zoning Districts. 
The project was reviewed based on the objective criteria and standards of the CP Commercial Pedestrian 
Zoning District, the conforming Zoning District of the Urban Village General Plan Land Use Designation. 
The project is proposed to be constructed in two phases. Phase one would consist of the construction of a 
seven-story, approximately 173,925-square foot mixed use building located on the eastern end of the 
subject site. Phase one would include 103 residential units and approximately 11,387 square feet of 
ground floor commercial retail space. The construction of Phase one is expected to take approximately 24 
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 4 of 24 
 
months. Phase two would consist of the construction of a seven-story, approximately 115,001-square foot 
mixed use building located on the southeast corner of West San Carlos Street and Buena Vista Avenue. 
Phase two would include 70 residential units and approximately 6,449 square feet of ground floor 
commercial retail space. The construction of Phase 2 is also expected to take 24 months, for a total 
construction period of 48 months. The maximum height of both buildings would be 92 feet.  
The project site is accessible from a right-in/right-out 26-foot-wide driveway on West San Carlos Street. 
Vehicle and motorcycle parking would be provided in a ground floor garage as well as a subterranean 
garage below both buildings. A total of 189 vehicle parking spaces would be provided, requiring an 
approximately 42 percent parking reduction. To achieve the required parking reduction, the project would 
implement a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) plan as outlined in the Municipal Code 
Conformance analysis below. The project would provide a total of 73 bicycle parking spaces and 49 
motorcycle parking spaces.  
The project includes an approximately 30-foot-wide paseo located in the rear of the site. The paseo would 
include paved areas, landscaping, planters, trees, a play area, dog park, and low-level bollard lighting. The 
paseo is planned to be connected to the public right-of-way at Buena Vista Avenue to the west and Willard 
Avenue with the construction of a proposed development to the east.  
The City of San José, as the lead agency for the project, prepared a Draft Environmental Impact Report 
(Draft EIR), which was circulated for public review and comment for 45 days, from January 12, 2021 
through February 26, 2021. The EIR prepared for this project concluded that implementation of the 
proposed project would result in a significant impact to a historic resource. Specifically, the 
implementation of the project would result in impacts to candidate City Landmarks located at 1530 West 
San Carlos Street: One Craftsman-style house and seven Spanish Revival-style bungalows. The EIR 
determined that demolition of the residences at 1530 West San Carlos Street, eligible as candidate City 
Landmark structures, would be a significant and unavoidable impact. Even though mitigation measures 
that include documentation, relocation, and salvage would lessen the impact, the residences and the 
historic connection to the current location would be lost. Therefore, the impact would be significant and 
unavoidable. Thus, a Statement of Overriding Considerations is included in the record of project approval. 
 
 ANALYSIS   
The proposed Conditional Use Permit is analyzed with respect to conformance with:  
1.  AB 3194 
2.  Envision San José 2040 General Plan 
3.  West San Carlos Urban Village Plan 
4.  San José Municipal Code  
5.  Residential and Commercial Design Guidelines 
6.  Permit Findings 
7.  California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) 
8.  City Council Policies 
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 5 of 24 
 
State Law Assembly Bill 3194 (AB 3194) 
The applicant originally submitted the project as a Planned Development Rezoning and a Planned 
Development Permit. However, the project was converted to a Special Use Permit because zoning 
consistency with the General Plan is not required for certain specified types of residential and mixed -se 
projects under State Law Assembly Bill 3194 (AB3194). AB3194, an amendment to the Housing 
Accountability Act Amendment, which became effective on January 1, 2019. Per AB 3194, ”mixed-use 
developments consisting of residential and nonresidential uses with at least two-thirds of the square 
footage designated for residential use can proceed if it complies with CEQA and “is consistent with the 
objective general plan standards and criteria.” (Government Code sections 65589.5(h)(2)(B) and 
65589.5(j)(4)). Therefore, staff analyzed the  
The total square footage of the project is approximately 288,520 square feet, of which approximately 
17,836 square feet would consist of commercial space. Therefore, at least two-thirds of the square footage 
of the mixed-use project would be dedicated to residential space. The site has a General Plan Land Use 
Designation of Urban Village and is located in both the CP Commercial Pedestrian and R-M Multiple 
Residence Zoning Districts. The project was reviewed based on the objective criteria and standards of the 
CP Commercial Pedestrian Zoning District, the conforming Zoning District of the Urban Village General Plan 
Land Use Designation. The project was determined to be complete on June 4th, 2019.  
  
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 6 of 24 
 
 
Envision San José 2040 General Plan Conformance 
 
Figure 2 General Plan Land Use Map 
Land Use Designation 
As shown in the attached General Plan Map (Figure 2), the project site has an Envision San José 2040 General 
Plan Land Use/Transportation Diagram designation of Urban Village. The Urban Village designation is applied 
within the Urban Village areas that are planned in the current Horizon (see Chapter 7 – Implementation for a 
description of Planning Horizons and Urban Village Planning) to accommodate higher density housing growth 
along with a significant amount of job growth. This designation is also applied in some cases to specific sites 
within Urban Village Area Boundaries that have received entitlements for Urban Village type development. 
This designation supports a wide variety of commercial, residential, institutional or other land uses with an 
emphasis on establishing an attractive urban form in keeping with the Urban Village concept. Development 
within the Urban Village designation should conform to land use and design standards established with an 
adopted Urban Village Plan, which specifies how each Urban Village will accommodate the planned housing 
and job growth capacity within the identified Urban Village Growth Area.  The project is consistent with the 
Urban Village Land Use Designation as it would provide a higher density housing with ground floor 
commercial service for residents that live and work in the surrounding area. Additional analysis for 
conformance with the adopted West San Carlos Urban Village plan is below. The project is consistent with 
the following General Plan Policies: 
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 7 of 24 
 
General Plan Goal and Policies 
1.  Major Strategy #3 – Focus Growth: The Focused Growth Major Strategy plans for new residential and 
commercial growth capacity in specifically identified “Growth Areas” (Urban Villages, Specific Plan 
areas, Employment Areas, Downtown) while the majority of the City is not planned for additional 
growth or intensification. The strategy focuses new growth into areas of San José that will enable the 
achievement of economic growth, fiscal sustainability, and environmental stewardship goals, while 
supporting the development of new, attractive urban neighborhoods. While the Focused Growth 
strategy directs and promotes growth within identified Growth Areas, it also strictly limits new 
residential development through neighborhood infill outside of these Growth Areas to preserve and 
enhance the quality of established neighborhoods, to reduce environmental and fiscal impacts, and to 
strengthen the City’s Urban Growth Boundary. 
2.  Major Strategy #5: - Urban Village: The Urban Village Major Strategy promotes the development of 
Urban Villages to provide active, walkable, bicycle-friendly, transit-oriented, mixed-use urban settings 
for new housing and job growth attractive to an innovative workforce and consistent with the Plan’s 
environmental goals. The General Plan establishes the Urban Villages concept to create a policy 
framework to direct most new job and housing growth to occur within walkable and bike friendly 
Urban Villages that have good access to transit and other existing infrastructure and facilities. 
3.  High Quality Facilities and Programs Policy PR-1.9: As Urban Village areas redevelop, incorporate urban 
open space and parkland recreation areas through a combination of high quality, publicly accessible 
outdoor spaces provided as part of new development projects; privately or, in limited instances, 
publicly owned and maintained pocket parks; neighborhood parks where possible; as well as through 
access to trails and other park and recreation amenities. 
4.  Land Use and Employment Policy IE-1.3: As part of the intensification of commercial, Village, Industrial 
Park and Employment Center job Growth Areas, create complete, mixed-employment areas that 
include business support uses, public and private amenities, child care, restaurants, and retail goods 
and services that serve employees of these businesses and nearby businesses. 
5.  Community Design Policy CD-3.5: Encourage shared and alternative parking arrangements and allow 
parking reductions when warranted by parking demand.  
6.  Land Use Policy LU-9.1: Create a pedestrian-friendly environment by connecting new residential 
development with safe, convenient, accessible, and pleasant pedestrian facilities. Provide such 
connections between new development, its adjoining neighborhood, transit access points, schools, 
parks, and nearby commercial areas.  
Analysis: The redevelopment of the site is consistent with the General Plan Land Use Designation of 
Urban Village, as the project would provide a high-intensity mix of residential and commercial uses. The 
project would provide housing, retail options, and recreational opportunities in a central location, 
within a growth area, through the development of approximately 173 residential units and 17,836 
square feet of commercial retail space. Consistent with the General Plan policies for the development of 
Urban Villages, the project would incorporate a paseo at the rear of the site, which would be connected 
to the public right-of-way in the future. The project would include public improvements including the 
construction of 20-foot-wide sidewalks along West San Carlos Street and 12-foot-wide sidewalks along 
Buena Vista Avenue. The project also includes an approximately 42% parking reduction and the 
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 8 of 24 
 
implementation of a TDM plan. The TDM plan would include a package of measures to reduce vehicle 
trips and encourage transit ridership. TDM measures include providing an online kiosk of trip-planning 
resources, 100 percent unbundled parking for all residential spaces, VTA SmartPasses to all residential 
tenants, and on-site bicycle storage (See Exhibit F). The subject site is served by existing Valley 
Transportation Authority (VTA) Bus Routes 23 and Rapid 523. A new bus stop would be constructed at 
the project frontage along West San Carlos Street. The project would also include ample bicycle parking 
and street/sidewalk improvements that would facilitate bicycle and pedestrian access to the site.  
West San Carlos Urban Village Plan 
Land Use Designation 
The subject is located within the boundaries of the approved West San Carlos Urban Village. The West San 
Carlos Urban Village Plan was approved by City Council on May 8, 2018 (Resolution 78581). Within the 
Urban Village, the project is located within the Mixed-Use Residential Character Area. The Mixed-Use 
Residential Character Area is an eastern gateway into the Urban Village. The area is envisioned with 
higher-density mixed-use and residential development drawing energy from nearby Downtown San José 
and the Diridon Station. Development is proposed to range between three and seven stories with 
residential uses above a mix of active ground floor retail. The allowed residential density of this land use 
designation may range from 55 to 250 Dwelling Units per Acre (DU/AC). The project is consistent with the 
following goals and policies of the approved Stevens Creek Urban Village Plan: 
Urban Village Goals and Policies 
1.  Land Use Goal LU-2: Create a high-density, mixed-use, pedestrian-focused Urban Village that supports 
the commercial activity along West San Carlos Street and enhances the quality of life for residents in 
surrounding communities.  
2.  Land Use Policy LU-2.2: Ensure that residential development along West San Carlos Street and 
Meridian Avenue that is developed under the Urban Village Land Use Designation and located within 
the Mixed-Use Residential Character Area has ground-floor commercial and/or active uses fronting 
those streets. 
3.  Parks, Plazas, and Public Art Policy P-2.5: Employ green buffers/paseos when larger new development 
abuts existing neighborhoods or is located in such a way that allows for the continuation of a green 
paseo. 
4.  Land Use Goal LU-3: Ensure that new development and area improvements increase access to public 
space and to alternate modes of transportation.  
Analysis: The subject site is located within the West San Carlos Urban Village Plan, which was approved 
by City Council on May 8, 2018 (Resolution No. 78581). The project is consistent with the Urban Village 
land use designation, as it provides a high-intensity mix of residential and commercial retail uses. The 
project frontages include ground floor commercial space and active space on both West San Carlos 
Street and Buena Vista Avenue. The project would include the construction of two seven-story buildings 
with 173 residential units and approximately 17,836 square feet of commercial retail space located on 
the frontage along West San Carlos Street. The project would also include the construction of a 30-foot-
wide full landscaped paseo in the rear of the site, which would eventually connect to the Buena Vista 
Avenue and Willard Avenue, should the sites to the east and west be redeveloped. The paseo would 
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 9 of 24 
 
buffer the subject site from the lower density development to the south. As discussed in the General 
Plan section above, the project would implement a TDM plan that would encourage the use of public 
transportation. Adequate bicycle parking would also be provided for residents, employees, and retail 
customers. Furthermore, the project would construct 20-foot-wide sidewalks along West San Carlos 
Street to improve pedestrian access to and from the site.  
West San Carlos Urban Village Design 
The project conforms with the following key standards and guidelines of the West San Carlos Urban Village 
Plan, Chapter 5 Urban Design Concept. This Chapter provides an overall urban design framework for 
development within the West San Carlos Urban Village. 
1.  Urban Design Policy UD-3.2: Leverage private development to strengthen the public realm with 
improvements such as setbacks to accommodate space for wider sidewalks, shade-providing trees, and 
other pedestrian amenities. Explore the potential for “green buffer” strategies to integrate and expand 
local parks, open spaces, and pedestrian and bicycle pathways. 
2.  Urban Design Policy UD-3.3: Encourage the placement of ground-floor commercial space in new 
development especially along the street frontages of West San Carlos Street and Bascom Avenue. 
3.  Urban Design Policy UD-3.5: Provide proper height transitions between new, higher-density 
commercial and mixed-use development and adjacent single-family homes by using building setback, 
upper story stepback, and landscaping to soften the transition near property lines. 
4.  Urban Design Policy UD-5.7: Non-occupiable architectural features such as roof forms, chimneys, 
stairwells, and elevator housings may project up to ten feet above the maximum height limits, but shall 
not exceed the established daylight plane.  
5.  Urban Design Policy UD-6.1: Encourage the use of underground vehicle parking where feasible.  
Analysis: Both buildings would be located and oriented toward West San Carlos Street. Each building 
would provide clearly marked entrances and active frontages with transparent glass. As previously 
discussed, the project would include approximately 17,836 square feet of retail space along West San 
Carlos Street. The Phase 1 building is adjacent to a property designated as Residential Neighborhood. 
Therefore, the project provides a stepback of the upper floors as to not intercept the 45-degree daylight 
plane at the adjacent residential property line. Both buildings are landscaped at the rear to further 
soften the transition between the high intensity use along West San Carlos Street and the residential 
character of the neighborhood to the south. As previously discussed, the project also includes a 30-foot-
wide paseo at the rear of the site that would eventually connect to Willard Avenue and Buena Vista 
Avenue to allow for an additional pedestrian path and recreational space for the neighborhood. The 
project would improve pedestrian circulation and access with the construction of 20-foot-wide 
sidewalks along West San Carlos Street as well as 12-foot-wide sidewalks along Buena Vista Avenue. 
Both sidewalks would be landscaped with street trees to the satisfaction of the Department of 
Transportation (DOT).   
Municipal Code Conformance 
Land Use 
As shown in the attached Zoning Map (Figure 4), this site is located in the CP Commercial Pedestrian 
Zoning District and the R-M Multiple Residence Zoning District. Per AB3194, the project was evaluated for 
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 10 of 24 
 
conformance with the objective standards and criteria of the CP Commercial Pedestrian Zoning District, 
the conforming Zoning District to the Urban Village General Plan Land Use Designation. Pursuant to  
Section 20.40.100 and Table 20-90 (see Note 25) of the Zoning Ordinance, mixed use 
residential/commercial requires a Special Use Permit in the CP Zoning District when located in an Urban 
Village. 
 
Figure 3 Zoning Map 
Development Standards 
Setbacks and Height 
Development Standard  Required  Phase 1  Phase 2 
Front setback  None   None  None 
Side, interior setback  None  None  None 
Side, corner  None  None  None 
Rear, interior   15 feet  30 feet  N/A 
Rear, corner  15 feet  N/A  15 
Maximum height   95 feet  92 feet  92 feet 
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 11 of 24 
 
The project conforms with all objective setback and height requirements of the CP Commercial Pedestrian 
Zoning District and West San Carlos Village Plan. The West San Carlos Urban Village Plan allows a 
maximum height of 85 feet at the subject site. Non-occupiable architectural features such as roof forms, 
chimneys, stairwells, and elevator housing may project up to ten feet above the maximum height limits, 
for a total maximum height of 95 feet. As shown on the project plans the maximum height of the elevator 
shaft and stairwells of both buildings would be 92 feet. 
Parking 
  Commercial  Residential  Total 
  Studio  JR1 Bed  1 Bed  2 Bed  3 Bed   
Sq. Ft/Unit  15,160.6 sf of  17  35  48  70  3 
Count  floor area 
Parking  1/200 sf  1.25  1.25  1.25  1.7  2.0 
Ratio 
Spaces  75.8  21.25  43.75  60  119  6  326 
Required 
Spaces  189 vehicle spaces provided (42% parking reduction) 
Provided 
 
The Zoning Ordinance requires 328 vehicle parking spaces, but Section 20.90.220 of the Zoning Code 
authorizes a parking reduction of up to 50% of the required parking spaces for sites within a Growth Area 
and the implementation of a TDM Plan.  The project would provide 189 vehicle parking spaces on-site, an 
approximately 42% parking reduction. Up to 20% of the parking reduction would be allowed as the project 
is located within the West San Carlos Urban Village, a growth area. The additional 22% parking reduction 
would be allowed with the implementation of a TDM plan. A TDM plan, dated September 8, 2020 was 
prepared by Hexagon Transportation Consultants, Inc, which achieves a 22% parking reduction. In addition 
to providing the required bicycle parking spaces, showers, and lockers, the project would also implement 
additional TDM measures in accordance with Section 20.90.220 of the Municipal Zoning Code. The project 
would be required to provide an online kiosk of trip-planning resources, 100 percent unbundled parking 
for all residential spaces, VTA SmartPasses to all residential tenants, and on-site bicycle storage.  
In addition to the approximately 42% parking reduction, the project requires a total of 47 motorcycle 
parking spaces and 52 bicycle parking spaces. The project would provide 49 motorcycle parking spaces and 
73 bicycle parking spaces.  
Noise 
Pursuant to Section 20.40.600 of the Municipal Code, the maximum noise level for commercial uses 
adjacent to a commercial property line is 60 decibels, and adjacent to a property used or zoned for 
residential uses is 55 decibels. A Noise Study, titled “1530-1544 West San Carlos Street Mixed-Use 
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 12 of 24 
 
Development Noise and Vibration Assessment”, was prepared by Illingworth & Rodkin Inc. on March 26, 
2020. The noise study evaluated noise related to the construction and operations of the project, from 
various noise sensitive receptors surrounding the project site.  The study also measured future exterior 
noise resulting from the use of communal open space in the exterior of each building. Exterior noise levels 
were calculated from the center of each outdoor common open space area. Noise measurements were 
taken from across West San Carlos Street to the north, along the east side of Buena Vista Avenue to the 
southwest of the site, and in the center of the site where the Phase 2 building would be located. 
Specifically, the noise study evaluated outdoor use areas at the proposed site, including the courtyards and 
common open spaces on the third, fifth, and seventh floors of the buildings. The noise study found that 
noise related to the common open space area at the common open spaces would not exceed 55 decibels. 
Furthermore, the seventh-floor roof terrace would be reduced to below 55 decibels as it would be the 
furthest from West San Carlos Street and would be shielded by the building edge.  
All construction noise would be temporary and is expected to take approximately 48 months. The 
Environmental Impact Report includes mitigation measures to address noise impacts related to 
construction. Mitigation measures require the applicant to submit a noise logistics plan as outlined in the 
West San Carlos Project Environmental Impact Report. As the site is located within 500 feet of a residence, 
the construction hours would be limited to 7:00 AM to 7:00 PM Monday through Friday.   
Tree Removals 
The project includes the removal of 15 trees (11 ordinance-sized and four non-ordinance-sized). The trees 
proposed to be removed are located either within the proposed building footprint, within the newly 
dedicated sidewalks, within the paseo area, or within necessary driveways. . The trees to be removed 
include Apple (1), Southern Magnolia (1), Blue Jacaranda (1), Boxelder (1), Chinese Firethorn (2), White 
Willow (1), White Crepe Myrtle (1), Blue Potato Bush (1), and Australian blackwood (1). Based on the Tree 
Survey prepared for the project, by David J. Powers and Associated, dated April 29, 2019, five of the tree 
species on-site were unable to be identified. Therefore, these trees were conservatively estimated as 
ordinance-size non-native species of trees. The removal of all 15 trees on-site requires the replacement of 
26 trees (24-in box) on site. Based on the plans provided, 26 24-inch box trees would be planted on-site. 
The trees to be planted include a mix of Maidenhair, Litteleaf Linden, Accolade Elm, Sweet Bay, Brisbane 
Box, Flowering Plum, Flowering Cherry, Bronze Loquat, Dwarf Southern Magnolia, and Sawleaf Zelkova 
trees.   
Design Guidelines 
The project was submitted on April 29th, 2019, prior to the effective date of the Citywide Design Standards 
and Guidelines on March 25th, 2021. The Commercial Design Guidelines were adopted in May 1990 and the 
Residential Design Guidelines were adopted in February 1997. Both the Commercial and Residential Design 
Guidelines were effective when this Special Use Permit was formally submitted to the City. Therefore, the 
project is required to conform with the following provisions of the City’s Commercial Design Guidelines 
and Residential Design Guidelines, in addition to conformance with the Stevens Creek Urban Design 
Policies..  
   
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 13 of 24 
 
•  Pedestrian Orientation: Mixed use project should include direct and attractive pedestrian access to all 
nearby commercial areas, transit stops, and transit stations. Sidewalks and walkways should be wide, 
separated from conflicting activities, and bordered by attractive landscaping, most importantly by 
street and/or shade trees. 
•  Mix of Uses:  
  Retail uses should be limited to the ground floor spaces along busy street frontages 
o
  Office uses may be located on the first and/or upper floors 
o
•  Interface Between Uses: Commercial loading areas, trash facilities, and mechanical equipment should 
be screened from sight by all pedestrian ways and should be located away from residential entries. 
•  Building Orientation: Buildings should be oriented parallel to the street particularly at corners. 
Buildings and, in particular, entrances should be oriented towards light rails stations and bus stops. 
•  Structured Parking: Structured parking is preferable for vertical mixed use projects and for horizontal 
mixed use projects in more urban locations. Parking which is intended to support commercial uses 
should be placed in convenient proximity to such uses. The blank walls of parking floors should not be 
placed along streets or major pedestrian ways. 
Analysis: The scale and massing of both buildings are compatible within the development as well as 
within the surrounding neighborhood, which is planned as an area of significant residential and 
employment growth. Both buildings have zero front and side setbacks at the street frontages, 
consistent with both the Commercial Design Guidelines, Zoning Code and West San Carlos Urban Village 
Plan.  
Both seven-story mixed use buildings contain the three traditional portions of a building, the base, 
middle, and top. Active retail and lobby space is provided on the ground floor with well-defined 
entrances and transparent glass. All parking would be screened from view along West San Carlos 
Street, with the majority of the parking structure located at the rear of the site away from the street or 
underground. The corner element of the phase two building is defined and the project includes façade 
articulation and recessed windows with minimal mullions. Both buildings also include adequate 
provisions for trash, storage and loading/service areas located in the ground floor parking garage. All 
rooftop equipment mechanical equipment would be screened from view on both buildings.   
•  All areas not covered by building streets, drives, or parking should be landscaped. The developer 
should plan street trees of an approved species and size along all public and private streets. 
Landscaping should be provided in all setback areas between project walls and/or fences. 
Analysis: As previously discussed, the project includes the construction of a paseo at the rear of the 
subject site that is planned to connect to Buena Vista Avenue to the west and Willard Avenue to the 
East. The paseo would remain as private common open space until it is connected to the public right-of-
way and offered as a privately owned, publicly accessible open space. The paseo and all common open 
space areas would be landscaped with trees, shrubs, grasses, and ground cover. The portion of the 
property adjacent to the single-family houses along the paseo would be well landscaped to screen the 
site and soften the transition between the project and adjacent residential uses. The project would also 
plant street trees along both project frontages. The species and number of street trees is to be 
determined at the public improvements stage as conditioned by the Public Works Department.   
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 14 of 24 
 
•  Residential Open Space: Private open space should be provided at a minimum of 60 square feet per 
unit with a minimum dimension of 6 feet. Common Open Space should be provided at a minimum of 
100 square feet per unit.  
Analysis: Both buildings provide adequate private and common open space. Each unit would include a 
minimum of 60 square feet of private open space. The project would include 173 units and a total of 
26,680 square feet of common open space. Therefore, approximately 154 square feet of common open 
space would be provided per unit. Both buildings would include a mix of terraces and courtyards on the 
third, fifth, and seventh floors. The top of the phase two building is defined by the active rooftop 
common area. 
Permit Findings 
In order for this application to be approved, the City Council must be able to make all required findings for 
a Special Use Development Permit, Site Development Permit, Reduction in Required Vehicle Parking 
Spaces, Tree Removal Permit, and Demolition Permit. 
Special Use Permit Findings 
Pursuant to San José Municipal Code Section 20.100.820, staff recommends the Planning Commission, 
make the following findings: 
1.  The Special Use Permit, as approved, is consistent with and will further the policies of the General Plan 
and applicable Specific Plans and Area Development Policies; and 
Analysis: As discussed above, the project is consistent with the General Plan goals and policies for focused 
growth, Urban Villages, land use, and employment. The project would also be consistent with the goals 
and policies of the West San Carlos Urban Village for land use, employment, and urban design. The 
project would provide a high intensity mix of residential and commercial retail uses. The project would 
provide jobs, retail options, and recreational opportunities in a central location with the construction of 
two seven-story buildings consisting of 173 residential units and 17,836 square feet of commercial retail 
space. The project would also provide a 30-foot-wide paseo in the rear of the phase one building, that 
would ultimately provide an inter-block connection from Buena Vista Avenue to Willard Avenue upon 
redevelopment of the sites to the east and west. 
2.  The Special Use Permit, as approved, conforms with the zoning code and all other provisions of the San 
José Municipal Code applicable to the project; and 
Analysis: As discussed in the Municipal Code Conformance section above, the project is consistent with all 
applicable objective criteria of the CP Commercial Pedestrian Zoning District and the approved West San 
Carlos Urban Village Plan. The project would also provide the required number of vehicle parking spaces 
with an approximately 42 percent parking reduction through the implementation of a Transportation 
Demand Management (TDM) program. The project provides all required clean air vehicle, bicycle, 
motorcycle parking requirements. Operational noise including indoor and outdoor areas, mechanical 
equipment, and would conform with the Zoning Code requirements for noise in a Commercial and 
Residential Zoning District. Additionally, the project includes the removal of six ordinance-size and three 
non-ordinance-size trees. The removal of all nine trees on-site requires the replacement of 14 trees (24-
inch box trees) on site. Based on the plans provided, 26 24-inch box trees would be planted on-site. 
   
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 15 of 24 
 
3.  The Special Use Permit, as approved, is consistent with applicable City Council policies, or 
counterbalancing considerations justify the inconsistency; and 
Analysis: The project was duly noticed per Council Policy 6-30: Public Outreach Policy for Pending Land 
Use and Development Proposals and on-site noticing/posting requirements. A joint Environmental 
Scoping and Community Meeting was held on January 9, 2020. The meeting was attended by 
approximately 22 members of the public. 
4.  The proposed use at the location requested will not: 
a.  Adversely affect the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of persons residing or working in the 
surrounding area; or 
b.  Impair the utility or value of property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site; or 
c.  Be detrimental to public health, safety, or general welfare; and 
Analysis: As described above, the mixed-use project, including the commercial retail space, would 
not impact the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of persons residing or working in the 
surrounding area. The residential, retail space, and common areas would be located wholly within 
the project site, and all activity in these spaces would not impact the area outside of the building. 
The project would not impair the utility or value of property or persons in the immediate area as any 
us in the retail portion of the project would be fully contained in the building and would not impact 
any adjacent property.   
5.  The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls, fences, parking and 
loading facilities, landscaping and other development features prescribed in this title, or as is otherwise 
required in order to integrate the use with existing and planned uses in the surrounding area; and 
Analysis: The approximately 1.34-gross acre site would be adequate in size to accommodate the two 
mixed-use buildings as well as the necessary common outdoor space, landscaping, parking and loading. 
All parking would be located on either the ground level, behind the retail storefronts, or in a one level 
subterranean garage. Common outdoor space, including landscaping, would be located at the rear of 
both buildings, or on the upper floors where they would be accessible to residents. The paseo at the 
southern end of the Phase I building would be 30 feet wide and would soften the transition between the 
new development and the residential neighborhoods to the south.  
6.  The proposed site is adequately served: 
a.  By highways or streets of sufficient width and improved as necessary to carry the kind and quantity 
of traffic such use would generate; or by other forms of transit adequate to carry the kind and 
quantity of individuals such use would generate; and 
b.  By other public or private service facilities as are required. 
Analysis: Vehicular access to the site would be from West San Carlos Street, with right-in/right-out 
turns only. Regional vehicular access would be provided from West San Carlos Street and Interstate 
280, located approximately 2,300 feet to the south. Pedestrian access would be provided from West 
San Carlos Street and Buena Vista Avenue.  VTA Route 23 bus stops are located directly across West 
San Carlos Street to the north and directly across Buena Vista Avenue to the west. The project is 
located in an urbanized area and is served by all required utilities and services. A Traffic Memo was 
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 16 of 24 
 
prepared by Public Works, dated May 24, 2021. The Local Transportation Analysis (LTA) found that 
the four nearest signalized intersection, and one unsignalized intersection, and vehicle queueing for 
nearby left turn lanes would continue to operate acceptably with the completion of the project. The 
project is conditioned to install a crosswalk at the east leg of West San Carlos Street and Buena Vista 
Avenue with a traffic signal modification to accommodate the reconfiguration. The project is also 
required to construct a new bust stop with a bus pad along the project frontage. As discussed above, 
the project would also implement a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Plan to allow the 
approximately 42 percent parking reduction. With the inclusion of the conditions and implementation 
of the TDM plan, the project would be in conformance with the City of San José Transportation 
Analysis Police (Council Policy 5-1).  
Site Development Permit Findings 
To make the Site Development Permit findings pursuant to San José Municipal Code Section 20.100.630, 
and recommend approval to the City Council, the Planning Commission must determine that: 
1.  The Site Development Permit, as approved, is consistent with and will further the policies of the 
General Plan, applicable specific plans and area development policies; and 
Analysis: See Special Use Permit Finding 1 above.  
2.  The Site Development Permit, as approved, conforms with the Zoning Code and all other Provisions of 
the San José Municipal Code applicable to the project; and 
Analysis: See Special Use Permit Finding 2 above. 
3.  The Site Development Permit, as approved, is consistent with applicable City Council policies, or 
counterbalancing considerations justify the inconsistency; and 
Analysis See Special Use Permit Finding 3 above. 
4.  The interrelationship between the orientation, location, and elevations of proposed buildings and 
structures and other uses on-site are mutually compatible and aesthetically harmonious. 
Analysis:  Both buildings would be seven stories and have a maximum height of 92 feet. The entrances 
of the buildings would also be oriented towards West San Carlos Street. The parking garage would be 
located towards the rear of the site, away from the primary activity areas of the development, with one 
level located underground. The project also includes a 30-foot-wide paseo, which would provide on-site 
connectivity between future developments to the east and west.  
5.  The orientation, location, and elevation of the proposed buildings and structures and other uses on the 
site are compatible with and are aesthetically harmonious with adjacent development or the character 
of the neighborhood. 
Analysis: The subject site is surrounded by low density single-family and multifamily residences to the 
south, commercial uses to the east and west, and multifamily residential uses across West San Carlos 
Street to the north. Both buildings would be located along West San Carlos Street, with the highest 
portions of both buildings located away from lower density development to the south. Additionally, a 
30-foot-wide fully landscaped paseo would be constructed in the rear of the site to further buffer the 
high-density development from the lower density residential uses to the south. The project would 
provide a mix of housing, retail, and recreational opportunities and would revitalize an existing 
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 17 of 24 
 
underutilized commercial area within the West San Carlos Urban Village.  
6.  The environmental impacts of the project, including but not limited to noise, vibration, dust, drainage, 
erosion, storm water runoff, and odor which, even if insignificant for purposes of the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), will not have an unacceptable negative effect on adjacent property 
or properties.  
Analysis: The project development occurs in an urbanized area on a parcel that is fully developed with 
existing commercial and residential buildings and surface parking lots. An Environmental Impact Report 
(EIR) was completed for the project and mitigation measures were identified for implementation during 
construction and operation to reduce potentially significant impacts; therefore, there would be no 
significant impacts from noise, vibration, dust, drainage, erosion, stormwater runoff and odor with the 
implementation of this project. The project was evaluated per adopted stormwater requirements in the 
City’s Post-Construction Urban Runoff Management Policy (Policy 6-29), and the Stormwater Control 
Plan has been and has been found in compliance. Additionally, the proposed residential and commercial 
uses are not anticipated to create odor or unusual noise as the majority of the development’s activity 
occurs indoors. Furthermore, the project would include a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) 
plan to reduce automobile trips, consistent with parking reduction requirements. Construction activities 
will result in temporary noise and air quality impacts. These temporary impacts will be temporary and 
will be minimized through standard construction mitigation measures, as listed in the project conditions 
of approval. Therefore, the project would not have an unacceptable impact on adjacent properties.  See 
further discussion below related to CEQA. 
7.  Landscaping, irrigation systems, walls and fences, features to conceal outdoor activities, exterior 
heating, ventilating, plumbing, utility and trash facilities are sufficient to maintain or upgrade the 
appearance of the neighborhood. 
Analysis: Both buildings include screening for all rooftop mechanical equipment as well as landscape 
screening for the adjacent residential area to the south. The ground floor garage is located behind the 
ground floor retail along West San Carlos Street. The garage screening on Buena Vista Avenue includes 
dark formed metal panels and composite metal panels that adequately screen the garage from view of 
the street, while maintaining consistency in color and materials with the larger building. All trash, 
storage, and utility facilities are located indoors.    
8.  Traffic access, pedestrian access and parking are adequate. 
Analysis: Vehicular access to the site would be from West San Carlos, with right-in/right-out turns only 
Regional vehicular access would be provided from West San Carlos Street and Interstate 280, located 
approximately 2,300 feet to the south. Pedestrian access would be provided from West San Carlos Street 
and Buena Vista Avenue.  VTA Route 23 bus stops are located directly across West San Carlos Street to the 
north and directly across Buena Vista Avenue to the west. The project is located in an urbanized area and 
is served by all required utilities and services. The project provides the required number of vehicle parking 
spaces in a conveniently located parking garage with a 42% parking reduction through the 
implementation of a TDM program. The project provides all required bicycle, motorcycle, clean air, and EV 
parking as required by the Zoning Code. 
 
 
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 18 of 24 
 
Parking Reduction Findings 
To make the findings for a Reduction in the Required Off-Street Parking Spaces pursuant to San José 
Municipal Code Section 20.90.220, and recommend approval to the City Council, the Planning Commission 
must determine that: 
1.  The structure or use is located within two thousand (2,000) feet of a proposed or an existing rail 
station or bus rapid transit station, or an area designated as a Neighborhood Business District, or as an 
Urban Village, or as an area subject to an area development policy in the City’s General Plan or the use 
is listed in Section 20.90.220G; and 
2.  The structure or use provides bicycle parking spaces in conformance with the requirements of Table 
20-90. 
3.  For any reduction in the required off-street parking spaces that is more than twenty percent, the 
project shall be required to implement a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) program that 
contains but is not limited to one of the following measures: 
a.  Implement a carpool/vanpool or car-share program, e.g., carpool ride-matching for employees, 
assistance with vanpool formation, provision of vanpool or car-share vehicles, etc., and assign 
carpool, vanpool and car-share parking at the most desirable on-site locations at the ratio set 
forth in the development permit or development exception considering type of use; or 
b.  Develop a transit use incentive program for employees and tenants, such as on-site distribution 
of passes or subsidized transit passes for local transit system (participation in the regionwide 
Clipper Card or VTA SmartPass system will satisfy this requirement). 
4.  In addition to the requirements of Section 20.90.220, for any reduction in the required off-street 
parking spaces that is more than twenty percent, the project shall be required to implement a TDM 
program that contains but is not limited to at least two of the following measures in Section 20.90.200 
A.1.d. 
Analysis: The project requires 328 vehicle parking spaces. Pursuant to Section 20.90.220 of the Zoning 
Code, a parking reduction of up to 50% of the code required parking spaces may be permitted for sites 
within a Growth Area with the implementation of a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Plan.  
189 vehicle parking spaces would be provided with the implementation of a TDM Plan (See Exhibit F) to 
allow for an approximately 42% parking reduction. A TDM Plan, dated September 8, 2020 was prepared 
by Hexagon Transportation Consultants, Inc, which reviewed the possibility of an approximately 42% 
parking reduction. In addition to providing the required bicycle parking spaces, showers, and lockers, 
the project would also implement additional TDM measures in accordance with Section 20.90.220 of 
the Municipal Zoning Code. The project would be required to provide an online kiosk of trip-planning 
resources, 100 percent unbundled parking for all residential spaces, VTA SmartPasses to all residential 
tenants, and on-site bicycle storage. 
Tree Removal Permit Findings 
In order to make the Tree Removal findings pursuant to Section 13.32.100 of the San José Municipal Code 
and recommend approval to the City Council, Planning Commission must determine that: 
   
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 19 of 24 
 
1.  That the condition of the tree with respect to disease, danger of falling, proximity to an existing or 
proposed structure, and/or interference with utility services, is such that preservation of the public 
health or safety requires its removal. 
2.  That the location of the tree with respect to a proposed improvement unreasonably restricts the 
economic development of the parcel in question; or 
Analysis: The project includes the removal of 15 trees (11 ordinance-sized and four non-ordinance-
sized). The trees proposed to be removed are located either within the proposed building footprint, 
within the newly dedicated sidewalks, within the paseo area, or within necessary driveways. The trees 
to be removed include Apple (1), Southern Magnolia (1), Blue Jacaranda (1), Boxelder (1), Chinese 
Firethorn (2), White Willow (1), White Crepe Myrtle (1), Blue Potato Bush (1), and Australian blackwood 
(1). Based on the Tree Survey prepared for the project, by David J. Powers and Associated, dated April 
29, 2019, five of the tree species on-site were unable to be identified. Therefore, these trees were 
conservatively estimated as ordinance-size non-native species of trees. The removal of all 15 trees on-
site requires the replacement of 26 trees (24-in box) on site. Based on the plans provided, 26 24-inch 
box trees would be planted on-site. The trees to be planted include a mix of Maidenhair, Litteleaf 
Linden, Accolade Elm, Sweet Bay, Brisbane Box, Flowering Plum, Flowering Cherry, Bronze Loquat, 
Dwarf Southern Magnolia, and Sawleaf Zelkova trees. 
Demolition Permit Findings 
Chapter 20.80 of the Municipal Code establishes evaluation criteria for the issuance of a permit to allow 
for demolition. These criteria are made for the project based on the above stated findings related to 
General Plan, Zoning and CEQA conformance and for the reasons stated below, and subject to the 
conditions set forth in the Resolution.  
1.  The failure to approve the permit would result in the creation or continued existence of a nuisance, 
blight or dangerous condition; 
2.  The failure to approve the permit would jeopardize public health, safety or welfare; 
3.  The approval of the permit should facilitate a project that is compatible with the surrounding 
neighborhood; 
4.  The approval of the permit should maintain the supply of existing housing stock in the City of San José; 
5.  Both inventoried and non-inventoried buildings, sites and districts of historical significance should be 
preserved to the maximum extent feasible; 
6.  Rehabilitation or reuse of the existing building would not be feasible; and 
7.  The demolition, removal or relocation of the building without an approved replacement building should 
not have an adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood.  
Analysis: The project includes the demolition of three existing commercial buildings, eight residential 
buildings, associated service structures, and one billboard totaling approximately 14,131 square feet. 
The approval of the demolition permit would not result in the creation or continued existence of a 
nuisance, blight or dangerous condition. The failure to approve the permit would not jeopardize public 
health, safety or welfare. The demolition permit would facilitate a project that is compatible with the 
surrounding neighborhood. As previously discussed, the project is consistent with all applicable General 
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 20 of 24 
 
Plan and West San Carlos Urban Village Plan goals and policies, zoning code requirements, applicable city 
council policies, and design guidelines. The demolition of the existing commercial buildings would 
facilitate the construction of two mixed-use buildings with 173 residential units and 17,836 square feet of 
commercial retail space. Given the scope of the project, the rehabilitation or reuse of any of the existing 
buildings on-site would not be feasible. Based on the Historic Resources Evaluation report (see Exhibit G), 
prepared by Treanor HL in July 2019, the EIR determined that demolition of the residences at 1530 West 
San Carlos Street, eligible as candidate City Landmark structures, would be a significant and 
unavoidable impact. Even though mitigation measures that include documentation, relocation, and 
salvage would lessen the impact, the residences and the historic connection to the current location 
would be lost. Therefore, the impact would be significant and unavoidable. While the demolition is not 
preserving the historic structures and Criterion 5 cannot be met, the project is satisfying other goals and 
policies of the General Plan explained in detail herein. The demolition of any existing buildings on-site 
would not be approved until the issuance of a grading or building permit, whichever comes first, as 
conditioned in this Special Use Permit for the subject site.  
 
 CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA)   
The City of San José, as the lead agency for the project, prepared a Draft Environmental Impact Report 
(Draft EIR) (State Clearinghouse Number 2019120341), which was circulated for public review and 
comment for 45 days, from January 12, 2021 through February 26, 2021. 
The EIR prepared for this project concluded that implementation of the proposed project would result in a 
significant impact to a historic resources (Candidate City Landmarks). Specifically, the implementation of 
the project would result in impacts to candidate City Landmarks located at 1530 West San Carlos Street: 
One Craftsman-style house and seven Spanish Revival-style bungalows.  
Significant Unavoidable Impacts 
CUL-1:  Implementation of the proposed project would result in the demolition of the Craftsman-style 
house and the seven Spanish Revival- style bungalows on-site that are eligible City Landmarks, a 
significant impact.  
CUL(C)-1: Implementation of the proposed project would result in a cumulatively considerable 
contribution to a significant cultural resources impact to the remaining Craftsman-style houses and 
bungalow courts in the City.  
The EIR determined that demolition of the residences at 1530 West San Carlos Street, eligible as candidate 
City Landmark structures, would be a significant and unavoidable impact. Even though mitigation 
measures that include documentation, relocation, and salvage would lessen the impact, the residences 
and the historic connection to the current location would be lost. Therefore, the impact would be 
significant and unavoidable. 
In addition, mitigation measures were developed to lessen the following project impacts to less than 
significant levels: exposure of sensitive receptors to toxic air contaminants, disturbance and/or destruction 
of migratory nesting birds, exposure of workers to residual contamination from previous industrial 
operations at the project site, exposure of sensitive receptors to construction noise, and damage to 
adjacent structures from construction vibration.  
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 21 of 24 
 
Standard Permit Conditions are also required to ensure no impacts occur during construction and 
operation of the project. These Standard Permit Conditions include best management practices for 
construction related air quality impacts, compliance with the Santa Clara Valley Habitat Plan, compliance 
with the California Building Code for seismic safety of the proposed building, erosion control during 
construction activities, protection of unknown subsurface resources, protection of construction workers 
from hazards related to asbestos containing materials and lead-based paint, water quality impacts during 
construction, and impacts to public facilities. 
CEQA Alternatives 
As required under CEQA, the Draft EIR identified and evaluated alternatives to the project. Three critical 
factors considered in the selection and evaluation of the alternatives included: (1) the significant impacts 
from the project that could be reduced or avoided by an alternative, (2) consistency with the project’s 
objectives, and (3) the feasibility of the alternatives available. The environmental analysis considered three 
project alternatives outlined in the Special Use Permit. These include: 
1.  No Project – No Development Alternative 
The No Project – No Development Alternative assumes that the project site would remain as it is today, 
which includes the existing auto commercial, commercial (restaurant), and martial arts commercial 
space, and residential developments on-site. The No Project No Development Alternative would avoid 
all of the project’s environmental impacts, including the significant and unavoidable impact to 
potential historic resources of significance to the City of San José. The No Project – No Development 
Alternative would not meet any of the project objectives. In addition, the existing development is 
lower than the density encouraged under the General Plan designation, West San Carlos Urban Village 
Plan and zoning, since the site currently contains lower commercial FAR and dwelling units per acre 
than the minimum requirement. Because the No Project – No Development Alternative would not 
result in any new development on the site, this Alternative would avoid all of the environmental 
impacts of the project. However, this Alternative would not meet any of the project objectives. 
2.  No Project – Existing Land Use Designation Alternative 
The No Project – Existing Land Use Designation Alternative is essentially the same as the proposed 
project. This alternative was proposed when the project still included a PD Planned Development 
Zoning application to rezone the site from the existing CP Commercial Pedestrian Zoning District and 
the R-M Multiple Residence Zoning District to a Planned Development Zoning District. This alternative 
maintained the existing zoning districts and would have constructed a similar project consistent with 
the General Plan designation and zoning districts. The originally proposed PD zoning would have 
afforded the project more flexibility in terms of site design and setbacks. Under Assembly Bill 3194, the 
Housing Accountability Act Amendment, effective January 1, 2019, the local governments’ authority is 
limited and cannot reject or restrict housing development projects that comply with applicable 
objective general plan, zoning, and subdivision standards.  Because rezoning is no longer required, 
there is no land use designation alternative. Importantly, alternatives are alternatives that would 
feasibly attain most of the basic objectives of the project but would avoid or substantially lessen any of 
the significant impacts of the project. Because this alternative does not reduce any impacts, it is not a 
reasonable or feasible alternative.  
   
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 22 of 24 
 
3.  Design Alternative – Relocate and restore five of the seven bungalows 
Demolition of the residential units on-site would result in a significant unavoidable impact to historic 
resources. The purpose of the Design Alternative is to avoid the project’s significant unavoidable 
impact to historic resources. The Design Alternative would require the project to be redesigned in a 
manner that would preserve the historic resources to the extent feasible while still allowing a 
physically feasible development on the project site. The proposed Building 1 of the Project would be 
redesigned with a reduced building footprint to allow five of the historic bungalow units to be 
relocated and preserved on the southern portion of the site. The proposed Building 2 would remain 
the same as the proposed project. The five bungalow units would be situated in a horseshoe layout 
and facing each other to form a central court in the middle, recreating a similar court-like court as the 
existing unit layout. Building 1, under this alternative, would have 24 fewer residential units, 11,165 
square feet less of commercial space, and 18,923 square feet less common space. Building 1 would 
include 79 residential units, 10,000 square feet of commercial space, and 6,000 square feet of common 
space, which combined with Building 2 would result in a density of 111 du/ac and 0.29 commercial 
FAR. Additionally, Building 1 would be set back at least 95 feet from the southern property line. 
Building stories and height would remain the same. Access to the site and bungalow units would be 
provided on the proposed driveway on West San Carlos Street. This design alternative would preserve 
five of the seven bungalow units and would lessen the significant impact to the historic resources by 
restoring the buildings consistent with the City’s requirements for historic buildings. All other impacts 
during construction and operation would be similar to that of the proposed project. 
Circulation and Public Comments 
The Draft EIR was circulated for public review for 45 days consistent with CEQA Guidelines Section 15132, 
starting on January 12, 2021 and ending on February 26, 2021.  Comments were received from regional and 
local agencies, including the County of Santa Clara, Roads and Airport Department, the Santa Clara Valley 
Transportation Authority (VTA), and the Santa Clara Valley Water District; and organizations, businesses, 
and individuals, including a letter from Lozeau Drury, LLP. and Pacific Gas & Electric Company (PG&E).  
Issues raised in these comment letters include the following: 
4.  County of Santa Clara, Roads and Airport Department: City annexation of project pockets to address all 
neighborhood traffic-related issues within those pockets. Reference to the annexation clause within the 
2006 Settlement Agreement between the County and the City of San Jose.  
5.  VTA: Request for the project to coordinate bus stop improvements to consolidate stop locations along 
West San Carlos Street and opportunity to review updated site plans to ensure the placement of 
driveways, landscaping and any other features do not conflict with bus operations; and comment on 
the proposed crossing at San Carlos Street and Willard Avenue. 
6.  Lozeau Drury LLP (dated February 26, 2021) on behalf of the Laborers International Union of North 
America (LiUNA): 1) DEIR fails to discuss indoor air quality impacts related to the project, in particular 
emissions of formaldehyde; 2) DEIR relies on unsubstantiated input parameters to estimate project 
emissions and thus fails to provide substantial evidence of the project’s air quality impacts; 3) the DEIR 
failed to disclose a significant air quality impact from Reactive Organic Gas (ROG) emissions; 4) the 
DEIR fails to adequately evaluate health risks from diesel particulate matter emissions; 5) The DEIR 
inadequately evaluated the project’s cumulative impacts.  
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 23 of 24 
 
Response to Public Comments addressed in First Amendment 
In accordance with CEQA Guidelines Section 15088, a First Amendment was prepared to provide responses 
to public comments submitted during the public circulation period and revisions to the text of the Draft 
EIR. As contained within the First Amendment, comments received either did not address the adequacy of 
the Draft EIR or the comment did not identify new or more significant impact(s), or a new feasible project 
alternative or mitigation measure considerably different than identified in the DRAFT EIR. For these 
reasons, no further CEQA analysis is required and the Draft EIR does not require recirculation. The Draft 
EIR taken together with the First Amendment constitutes the Final EIR.  
EIR Recirculation Unnecessary 
The comments received do not identify substantive inadequacies in the Draft EIR or new previously 
unidentified significant impacts that require recirculation. The recirculation of an EIR is required when 
significant new information is added to the EIR after public notice is given of the availability of the Draft 
EIR for public review but before certification. “Information” can include changes in the project or 
environmental setting as well as additional data or other information. New information added to a Draft 
EIR is not “significant” unless the Draft EIR is changed in a way that deprives the public of meaningful 
opportunity to comment on a substantial adverse environmental effect of the project or a feasible way to 
mitigate or avoid such an effect (CEQA Guidelines Section 15088.5). 
Statement of Overriding Considerations 
Section 15091(a) of the CEQA Guidelines stipulates that no public agency shall approve or carry out a 
project for which an EIR has been certified which identifies one or more significant environmental effects 
of the project unless the public agency makes one or more written findings. If the lead agency approves a 
project despite it resulting in significant adverse environmental impacts that cannot be mitigated to a less 
than significant level, the agency must state the reasons for its action in writing. Thus, a Statement of 
Overriding Considerations is included in the record of project approval.  
The Draft EIR taken together with the First Amendment constitutes the Final EIR. The Draft EIR and First 
Amendment to the Draft SEIR are available for review on the project page on the City’s Active EIRs website 
at: www.sanjoseca.gov/ActiveEIRs. 
   
     
 File No. SP20-004 
Page 24 of 24 
 
PUBLIC OUTREACH   
Staff followed Council Policy 6-30: Public Outreach Policy in order to inform the public of the proposed 
project. A notice of the public hearing was distributed to the owners and tenants of all properties located 
within 1,000 feet of the project site and posted on the City website. The staff report is also posted on the 
City’s website. Staff has also been available to respond to questions from the public. 
A formally noticed Community Meeting with the Environmental Scoping was held on Monday, January 9th, 
2020 to introduce the proposed project to the community. Approximately 22 members of the public 
attended the meeting. The questions and comments from community members included concerns related 
to building height, traffic, parking, lack of retail options, and sidewalk safety during construction. 
 
Project Manager:  Alec Atienza 
   
 
Approved by:   /s/                 , Deputy Director for Christopher Burton, Planning Director 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENTS: 
Exhibit A:   Draft EIR Resolution 
Exhibit B:  Draft Special Use Permit Resolution and Legal Description 
Exhibit C:  Special Use Permit Plan Set 
Exhibit D:  Transportation Analysis 
Exhibit E:  Noise Study 
Exhibit F:  TDM Plan  
Exhibit G:  1530-1536 West San Carlos Historic Resources Evaluation 
Exhibit H:   Signed MMRP 
Exhibit I:  Public Comments 
 
 
 
Owner:   Applicant:  
Urban Villas, LLC  Viji Mani 
22561 Poppy Drive  22561 Poppy Drive 
Cupertino, CA 95014  Cupertino, CA 95014 
   
   
     
 SP20-004 Links to Attachments 
 
 
Exhibit A:   Draft EIR Resolution 
Exhibit B:  Draft Special Use Permit Resolution and Legal Description 
Exhibit C:  Special Use Permit Plan Set 
Exhibit D:  Transportation Analysis 
Exhibit E:  Noise Study 
Exhibit F:  TDM Plan  
Exhibit G:  1530-1536 West San Carlos Historic Resources Evaluation 
Exhibit H:   Signed MMRP 
Exhibit I:  Public Comments 
 
 
Correspondence Received After July 7, 2021