COUNCIL AGENDA:  8/24/21 
  FILE:  21-1855 
  ITEM:  10.5 
   
 
 
  TO:  HONORABLE MAYOR  FROM:  Chris Burton 
    AND CITY COUNCIL 
     
SUBJECT:  SEE BELOW   DATE:  August 2, 2021 
                           
 
 
TRANSMITTAL 
 
 
SUBJECT:  HL21-001 & MA21-001 - APPLICATION FOR CITY LANDMARK 
DESIGNATION AND HISTORICAL PROPERTY (MILLS ACT) 
CONTRACT FOR THE PROPERTY LOCATED AT 285 SOUTH 12TH 
STREET (DOOBIE BROTHERS HOUSE) 
 
 
REASON FOR TRANSMITTAL 
 
The Historic Landmarks Commission is scheduled to hear this item on August 4, 2021. The City 
Council hearing is scheduled for August 24, 2021. The memorandum with the Commissions’ 
recommendations will be submitted under a different cover. 
 
 
              /s/           
              CHRIS BURTON, Director 
  Planning, Building, and Code Enforcement 
 
For questions, please contact Robert Manford, Deputy Director, at 408-535-7900. 
 
Attachment: Historic Landmarks Commission Staff Report 
 
                        
 
 
 
 HLC AGENDA:  8-4-21 
ITEM:  3.a. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
____________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
HISTORIC LANDMARKS COMMISSION 
  STAFF REPORT 
File Nos.   HL21-001 and MA21-001 
Application Type  City Landmark Designation and 
Historical Property (Mills Act) Contract 
Applicants  John and Lauren White 
Location   285 South 12th Street 
APN  467-41-054 
Zoning District  R-1-8 Single Family Residence 
Council District  3 
Historic Area  Naglee Park Conservation Area 
Historic Resource Inventory  Identified Structure  
Annexation Date  Original City 
CEQA  Exempt per CEQA Guidelines Section 15331  
 
APPLICATION SUMMARY:   
File No. HL21-001: Application for designation of 285 South 12th Street (Doobie Brothers 
House) as a City Landmark of special historical, architectural, cultural, aesthetic or engineering 
interest or value of an historic nature; and   
File No. MA21-001: Application for Historical Property (Mills Act) Contract for 285 South 12th  
Street between the City of San José and the property owner. 
 
RECOMMENDATION: 
Staff recommends the Historic Landmarks Commission recommend to the City Council approval 
of the following actions: 
a.  Adopt a resolution designating 285 South 12th Street (Doobie Brothers House) as a City 
Landmark of special historical, architectural, cultural, aesthetic or engineering interest or 
value of an historic nature; and  
b.  Approve the proposed Historical Property Contract for 285 South 12th Street and adopt the 
draft Resolution. 
 
 
 
 
 File Nos. HL21-001 & MA21-001 
Page 2 of 11 
 
 
PROJECT DATA 
 
GENERAL PLAN CONSISTENCY 
General Plan Designation  Residential Neighborhood 
 Consistent   Inconsistent 
Consistent Policies  LU-13, LU-13.6, LU-13.13 
Inconsistent Policies  None 
SURROUNDING USES 
  General Plan Land Use  Zoning  Existing Use 
North   Residential Neighborhood  R-1-8 Single Family  Single-family residence 
Residence 
South   Residential Neighborhood  R-1-8 Single Family  Single-family residence 
Residence 
East  Residential Neighborhood  R-1-8 Single Family  Single-family residence 
Residence 
West   Neighborhood/Community  CN Commercial  Restaurant, 7-Eleven 
Commercial  Neighborhood 
 
RELATED APPROVALS 
3/27/1850  Original City 
8/30/1955  Building Permit No. 1955-022519 for addition of a sleeping porch 
7/10/1967  Building Permit No. 1999-069931 for additions/alterations 
5/11/1981  Building Permit No. 1981-027978 for kitchen remodel 
7/7/1999  Building Permit No. 1999-062608 for a new accessory building 
12/10/2009  Building Permit No. 2009-042017 for re-roofing 
7/14/2020  Building Permit No. 2020-124887 for a new detached 336-square foot accessory 
dwelling unit (ADU) 
 
PROJECT LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION 
The subject property is located at 285 South 12th Street on the west side of South 12th Street, 
approximately 71 feet north of East San Carlos Street in the Naglee Park Conservation Area (see 
Figure 1). The property is surrounded by single-family houses to the north, east and south and a 
parking lot and related commercial uses to the west.  File Nos. HL21-001 & MA21-001 
Page 3 of 11 
 
 
Figure 1: Location Map 
 
On  May  6,  2021,  the  property  owners,  John  and  Lauren  White,  submitted  applications  to 
designate the house at 285 South 12th Street as a City Landmark (Doobie Brothers House) and to 
enter into a Historical Property (Mills Act) Contract to restore, rehabilitate and maintain the 
property over a 10-year period. 
The building proposed for City Landmark designation is a Craftsman-style house constructed in 
1907 (see Figure 2, Figure 3 and Figure 4).  
 
Figure 2: Front Façade of 285 South 12th Street File Nos. HL21-001 & MA21-001 
Page 4 of 11 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Front and South Façade  
 
 
Figure 4: North Façade 
 
The house is a one-story, hip and gable roof wood frame structure sheathed with composite 
shingle. The exterior is clad with tri-bevel wood drop siding (a single siding board seven inches 
wide milled to look like three beveled boards of 2 1/3 inches each). The house maintains its 
original wood-frame windows, trimmed with square wood casings. Most of the windows are 
one-over-one sash windows. In the center window of each bay are cottage windows with divided 
lights in the upper pane. There are two fixed pane windows with grilles of ten divided lights.  File Nos. HL21-001 & MA21-001 
Page 5 of 11 
 
The house maintains the following character-defining features: 
  Deep overhanging eaves with exposed rafter tails 
  Knee braces below the front bargeboard 
  Overhanging front gable supported by knee braces 
  Bay windows on three sides of the house 
  Side porch with battered columns and two recessed entrances 
The immediate setting for the house consists of a modestly sized front yard, with shrubbery in a 
garden bed at the front of the house. Three large oak trees edge the northern property line. The 
rear yard is landscaped with paved and grassy areas, flower beds, and low fencing. The garage 
that was part  of the original 1907 property was demolished and replaced by  an accessory 
dwelling unit in 2020. 
The house was designed by locally prominent architect Wesley Warren Hastings who designed 
more than 120 buildings in San Jose from 1904 to 1910, many of them located in the Naglee 
Park neighborhood. The house was built in 1907 by Wesley Hastings father, Alfred Hastings. 
The Hastings went into business together as A. W. Hastings & Son in 1904 and constructed 
thirty-six buildings, nearly all of them designed by Wesley Hastings. 
The house was constructed for Louis Normandin, a local automobile dealer and a business man, 
who lived there with his wife Estelle Pinard. Normandin and his partners Peter Maloney and 
Fritz Campen founded automobile sales company Normandin and Campen. They obtained their 
first company franchise in 1915, which was Franklin Automobile. The Normandins sold the 
house in 1920 to Thomas Rees, a widowed gardner, who lived there with his adult daughter 
Adaline and her son Russell until 1934. The property was primarily used as a boarding house and 
a rental property until 1964, when it was sold to J.M. Haney, a painter. Haney rented the house 
from 1969 to 1973 to Tom Johnston, a musician and a song writer, who along with John 
Hartman, Dave Shogren and Pat Simmons founded the legendary rock-and-roll band, the Doobie 
Brothers. The residence remained unaltered throughout its various occupants. John and Lauren 
Simonson-White are current owners of the property. 
The house is often referred to as the Doobie Brothers house where the world-renowned rock-and-
roll band got its start. Doobie Brothers founder, Tom Johnston, lived in the house from 1969 to 
1973 and wrote some of the band’s best-known songs. The band practiced in the house and 
developed its signature sound at this location. During this period three Doobie Brothers record 
albums were released. 
The identified period of significance for the property is 1907-1973, which begins with the 
construction of the house and its association with Louis and Estelle Normandin during the years 
Normandin  began  selling  automobiles  in  San José  and  ends  in  1973 when  Tom  Johnston, 
founder of  the Doobie Brothers, moved out of the house.  
 
 
 
 
 
 File Nos. HL21-001 & MA21-001 
Page 6 of 11 
 
ANALYSIS 
The applications for City Landmark designation and a Mills Act contract were analyzed with 
respect to conformance with: 1) the Envision San José 2040 General Plan; and 2) the Historic 
Preservation Ordinance. 
Envision San José 2040 General Plan Conformance 
The proposed City Landmark designation and Mills Act contract promotes the following goal 
and policies of the General Plan with respect to historic preservation: 
Historic Preservation Goal LU-13 – Landmarks and Districts:  Preserve and enhance historic 
landmarks and districts in order to promote a greater sense of historic awareness and community 
identity and contribute toward a sense of place.  
Analysis:  City Landmark designation and a Mills Act contract for 285 South 12th Street would 
preserve the sense of place and historic integrity of the Craftman style house, and promote 
awareness of its historic architecture and associations with San Jose residents from different 
waks of life who lived in and maintained the house for over 100 years, and created businesses, 
and music that is part of San Jose’s community identity. 
Historic Preservation Policy LU-13.6: Ensure modifications to candidate or designated landmark 
buildings or structures conform to the Secretary of the Interior’s Sandards for the Treatment of 
Historic  Properties  and/or  appropriate  State  of  California  Requirements  regarding  historic 
buildings and/or structures, including the California Historical Building Code. 
Analysis: City Landmark designation would require a Historic Preservation (HP) Permit for for 
exterior changes to the house and ancillary construction on the lot. The work would need to 
conform with the requirements of the Historic Preservation Ordinance, the Secretary of the 
Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties, and “Your Old House Guide for 
Preserving San José Homes.” The Mills Act contract would require the property owner to 
commit to a ten-year work plan to invest in the maintenance and rehabilitation the house. These 
requirements would address Historic Preservation Policy LU-13.6. 
Historic Preservation Policy LU -13.13: Foster the rehabilitation of buildings, structures, areas, 
places, and districts of historic significance. Utilize incentives permitting flexibility as to their 
uses; transfer of development rights; tax relief for designated landmarks and districts; easements; 
alternative building code provisions for the reuse of historic structures; and financial incentives. 
Analysis: A Mills Act contract for 285 South 12th Street would implement Historic Preservation 
Policy  LU  -13.13  by  utilizing  a  property  tax  incentive  to  foster  the  preservation  and 
rehabilitation of the house which has historic significance in its architecture and associations 
with San Jose residents from different waks of life who created local businesses and music. File Nos. HL21-001 & MA21-001 
Page 7 of 11 
 
Historic Preservation Ordinance Conformance for City Landmark Designation 
In accordance with the Historic Preservation Ordinance (Municipal Code Chapter 13.48), the 
Historic Landmarks Commission should consider, among other relevant factors, the following 
eight  criteria  in  making  the  findings  that  a  proposed  Landmark  has  special  historical, 
architectural, cultural, aesthetic, or engineering interest or value of an historical nature:  
1.  Its character, interest or value as part of the local, regional, state or national history, heritage or 
culture; 
2.  Its location as a site of a significant historic event; 
3.  Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the local, regional, 
state or national culture and history; 
4.  Its exemplification of the cultural, economic, social or historic heritage of the city of San José; 
5.  Its portrayal of the environment of a group of people in an era of history characterized by a 
distinctive architectural style; 
6.  Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen;  
7.  Its identification as the work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has 
influenced the development of the city of San José; and 
8.  Its embodiment of elements of architectural or engineering design, detail, materials or 
craftsmanship which represents a significant architectural innovation or which is unique. 
Based on the documentation and evaluation of the property prepared by a qualified historic 
resources consultant, Krista Van Laan of Archives and Architecture, dated revised July 12, 2021, 
(see Attachment 1), the house at 285 South 12th Street is eligible for City Landmark designation 
under the following four of the eight designation criteria: 
Criterion 1: Its character, interest or value as part of the local, regional, state or national 
history, heritage or culture. 
Analysis: The house built in 1907 was designed by Wesley Warren Hastings and reflects the 
Early  Arts  and  Crafts  Movement.  The  house  was  built  for  Louis  Normandin  who  was  an 
automobile dealer and a successful businessman. His father, Amos Normandin, originally a 
blacksmith from Montreal, had established the Pacific Carriage Factory in 1875 in San José. 
Louis  Normandin  and  his  friends  bought  the  company  in  1903  and  expanded  it  to  sell 
automobiles, thereby contributing to the local automobile industry in San José. Louis Normandin 
was an early graduate of Santa Clara University and moved into the house in 1908 where he 
lived  with  his  wife  Estelle  and  their  two  children  until  1920.  His  established  automobile 
dealership  business,  renamed  to  Normandin  in  1931,  is  associated  with  the  Chrysler 
Corporation, which has been in business for 146 years. The automobile dealership is located 
today at 900 Capitol Expressway Auto Mall. 
The house has been occupied by various groups of people, but is often referred to as the house in 
which the world-renowned rock-and-roll band, the Doobie Brothers, got its start. The house was 
the residence of Doobie Brothers founder Tom Johnston from 1969 to 1973. Johnson wrote some 
of the band’s best-known songs at this location. File Nos. HL21-001 & MA21-001 
Page 8 of 11 
 
Criterion 3: Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the 
local, regional, state or national culture and history. 
Analysis: The property is closely identified with Louis Normandin, who lived in the house with 
his wife and children from 1908 to 1920, and contributed to the development of San José as one 
of the oldest automobile dealers in the United States. Normandin promoted car travel and 
aviation in San José. 
The property is also closely identified with Tom Johnston, drummer John Hartman, bass player 
Dave Shogren, and guitarist Pat Simmons of the legendary rock-and-roll band the Doobie 
Brothers., who lived in the house from 1969 to 1973 and this period has been recognized in 
magazines, radio programs, and interviews as being critical to the early development of the 
rock-n-roll band and its success, thereby contributing to the cultural history of San Jose. 
Criterion 6: Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or 
specimen. 
Analysis: The house embodies distinguishing characteristics of the Craftsman-style California 
bungalow popular in the early twentieth-century era of residential architectural design. While 
not the biggest nor grandest house designed by architect Wesley Warren Hastings, the house is 
an early representation of the Craftsman style that dominated the small house market in the 
early 1900s, with architectural features such as the large side porch, with battered columns and 
recessed double entrances, deep overhanging eaves with exposed rafter tails, knee braces below 
a decorative front bargeboard and under the overhanging front gable, and bay windows on three 
sides of the house reflecting an early Arts and Crafts Movement design. 
Criterion  7:  Its  identification  as  the  work  of  an  architect  or  master  builder  whose 
individual work has influenced the development of the City of San José. 
Analysis: The subject property contributes to the uniqueness of the Naglee Park area as the 
work  of  a  twentieth-century  San  José  architect,  Wesley  Warren  Hastings,  who  is  locally 
recognized as a master architect whose work influenced the physical development of San José. 
The house was built by Alfred Hastings, who is responsible for building many significant homes 
in San José. Under the business name of A. W. Hastings & Son, the father-son pair designed and 
built a number of distinctive residences between 1904 and 1910 in the Reed City Landmark 
District, Naglee Park, and other neighborhoods in San José, and were responsible for designing 
and building the City Landmark house at 198 South 13th Street and Clarence Letcher house at 
101 South Sixteenth Street. 
Historic Preservation Ordinance Conformance for Mills Act Contract 
The Mills Act is state legislation that grants cities and counties the authority to enter into 
contracts  with  the  owners  of  qualified  historic  properties  who  actively  participate  in  the 
restoration and maintenance of their historic properties while receiving property tax relief. In the 
City of San Jose, qualified historic properties are those that have been designated as a City 
Landmark. Property taxes are recalculated using a formula in the Mills Act and Revenue and 
Taxation Code.  File Nos. HL21-001 & MA21-001 
Page 9 of 11 
 
The  minimum  duration  for  a  Mills  Act  Contract  is  ten  years.  Mills  Act  contracts  renew 
automatically every year after the initial ten-year period, unless the property owner or City opts 
to  end  the  contract.  Mills  Act  contracts  include  a  schedule  of  proposed  maintenance  and 
improvements that the owner agrees to complete. Such proposed maintenance and improvements 
are typically spread over a ten-year period. All work is required to comply with the Secretary of 
the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties and “Your Old House Guide for 
Preserving San José Homes.” The purpose of the Mills Act is to provide a long-term incentive 
for the restoration, rehabilitation and preservation of historic buildings that obligates current and 
future owners to the maintenance and care of the property.  
Required Findings of  Mills Act Contract (Historical Property Contract) 
Part 4 of the Historic Preservation Ordinance establishes a procedure for the administration of 
Mills Act (Historical Property) contracts pursuant to Section 50280 et seq. of the California 
Government Code, as amended, known as the California Mills Act of 1972. 
Section 13.48.540 sets forth the findings the City Council may, but under no circumstances 
shall be required to, approve an historical property contract. the City Council may approve a 
Mills Act contract pursuant to making certain findings. Outlined below are the findings followed 
by staff analysis: 
1.  The proposed contract is consistent with the General Plan. 
Analysis:  Preservation and rehabilitation of City Landmarks advances the goals of the 
Envision  San  José  2040  General  Plan,  specifically  Historic  Preservation  Goal  13  and 
Policies  LU-13.6  and  LU-13.13.  The  Mills  Act  contract,  in  conjunction  with  the  City 
Landmark designation, would advance Historic Preservation Goal 13 by preserving the 
sense of place and historic integrity of the Craftman style house, and promoting awareness of 
its historic architecture and associations with San Jose residents from different walks of life 
who lived in and maintained the house for over 100 years, and created businesses, art and 
music that is part of San Jose’s community identity. The Mills Act contract would require the 
property  owner  to  commit  to  a  ten-year  work  plan  to  invest  in  the  maintenance  and 
rehabilitation the house. In conjunction with the City Landmark designation, the work would 
conform with the requirements of the Historic Preservation Ordinance, the Secretary of the 
Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties, and “Your Old House Guide 
for Preserving San José Homes.” These requirements would address Historic Preservation 
Policy LU-13.6. The Mills Act contract would implement Historic Preservation Policy LU -
13.13 by utilizing a property tax incentive to foster the preservation and rehabilitation of the 
house which has historic significance in its architecture and associations with San Jose 
residents from different walks of life who created local businesses, art and music.   
2.  The proposed contract would provide greater protection for the landmark property 
than is otherwise provided by the provisions of Municipal Code Chapter 13.48. 
Analysis: The Mills Act contract would provide greater protection for the City Landmark 
because  the  Historical  Property  Contract  includes  a  schedule  of  maintenance  and 
improvements the owner would agree to complete over a ten-year period. The Mills Act 
contract would require: File Nos. HL21-001 & MA21-001 
Page 10 of 11 
 
Year 1: Repair and repaint exterior wood siding on the exterior and interior wall surfaces. 
Install historic bronze plaque to display in front of house. 
Year 2: Foundation repairs, restore fireplace and regrade the yard for soil to slope away 
from the house.  
Year 3: Waterproof basement to prevent leaks. 
Year 4: Strip paint from windows, door frames and trim to restore natural wood, varnish as 
necessary. 
Year 5: Strip paint from windows, door frames and trim to restore natural wood, varnish as 
necessary. 
Year  6:  Replace  bargeboards  and  front  beams  on  house  with  original  notched  and 
protruding decorative ends. 
Year 7: Replace and repair drainage/downspouts. 
Year 8: Upgrade plumbing and electric wiring as necessary. 
Year 9: Repaint exterior of the house and repair siding as necessary. 
Year 10: Replace composition shingle roofing. 
3.  The proposed contract complies with the required provisions of Historical Property 
Contracts listed above. 
Analysis: The proposed Historical Property Contract includes a description of the landmark 
property;  a  minimum  contract  period  of  ten  years;  specific  conditions  requiring 
preservation of the landmark property including the required 10-year work plan as outlined 
above and conformance with the Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation, the 
California State Historical Building Code, and the requirements of the City; provision for 
the periodic examination of the interior and exterior of the landmark property for least five 
years by the City of San José and the County of Santa Clara to determine the owner's 
compliance with the contract; a requirement that the property owner(s) annually expend an 
amount equal to a minimum of ten percent of the tax savings attributed to the contract to 
the preservation and maintenance of the landmark property, and make this documentation 
available to the City of San José at the time of the periodic examination; a provision that 
the contract is binding and applies to all successors in interest to the owner(s) who entered 
into the contract; and a provision requiring recordation of the contract with the Santa 
Clara County recorder's office within six months of the effective date of the contract. 
 
CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT 
The  project  has  been  determined  to  be  exempt  from  the  provisions  of  the  California 
Environmental Quality Act per Section 15331. The project is limited to maintenance, repair, 
stabilization, rehabilitation, restoration, preservation, conservation or reconstruction of historical 
resources in a manner consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment 
of Historic Properties. File Nos. HL21-001 & MA21-001 
Page 11 of 11 
 
 
PUBLIC HEARING NOTIFICATION 
Staff  followed  the  public  notification  requirements  of  Section  13.48.110  of  the  San  José 
Municipal Code.  A notice of this hearing appeared in a newspaper of general record at least 10 
days prior to the hearing, a mailing of the notice to the property owner and occupants and posting 
the notification of the hearing along the frontage of the site. The staff report is also posted on the 
City’s website.  Staff has been available to respond to questions from the public. 
 
 
Project Manager:  Rina Shah, Planner 
   
Approved by:           /s/         Christopher Burton, Planning  Director 
Date:   7/26/2021 
 
Attachments: 
1.  State Department of Parks and Recreation forms (DPR 523A & B), revised July 12, 2021, 
prepared by Krista Van Laan of Archives and Architecture 
2.  Draft Resolution for HL21-001 
3.  Draft Resolution for MA21-001 
4.  10-Year Preservation Plan for MA21-001 
 
Owner/Applicant Address: 
John and Lauren White 
285 South 12th Street  
San Jose, CA 95112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 HL21-001 & MA21-001  
Links to the Attachments 
Click on the title to view document 
 
 
1.  State Department of Parks and Recreation forms (DPR 523A & B), revised July 12, 2021, prepared by Krista 
Van Laan of Archives and Architecture 
2.  Draft Resolution for HL21-001 
3.  Draft Resolution for MA21-001 
4.  10-Year Preservation Plan for MA21-001