COUNCIL AGENDA:  1/26/2021 
        FILE:  21-137 
  ITEM:  10.3 
 
  TO:  HONORABLE MAYOR AND  FROM:  Planning Commission 
    CITY COUNCIL 
 
  SUBJECT:  SEE BELOW  DATE:  January 4, 2021 
                           
 
COUNCIL DISTRICT: 3 
 
SUBJECT:  FILE NO. GP19-012, C19-042, CP20-019 & T20-020. GENERAL PLAN 
AMENDMENT FROM RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD TO DOWNTOWN; 
A CONFORMING REZONE FROM LI LIGHT INDUSTRIAL AND R-2 TWO-
FAMILY RESIDENCE TO DC DOWNTOWN PRIMARY COMMERCIAL; A 
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT TO ALLOW THE DEMOLITION OF 
EXISTING STRUCTURES AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF A MIXED-USE 
SIX-STORY BUILDING INCLUDING A 190-BED COMMERCIAL 
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY WITH 116 ASSISTED LIVING GUEST 
ROOMS AND 49 MEMORY CARE GUEST ROOMS, FOUR MULTI-FAMILY 
RESIDENTIAL UNITS, AND A BACK-UP GENERATOR, INCLUDING A 
DEVELOPMENT EXCEPTION TO ALLOW A REDUCED 12-FOOT HEIGHT 
FOR THE REQUIRED ON-SITE LOADING SPACE; AND A VESTING 
TENTATIVE MAP TO MERGE SEVEN PARCELS INTO ONE PARCEL ON A 
0.90-GROSS ACRE SITE LOCATED ON THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF 
WEST SAN CARLOS STREET AND GIFFORD AVENUE (470 WEST SAN 
CARLOS STREET). 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION  
 
The Planning Commission voted 6-0-1 (Bonilla absent) to recommend that the City Council: 
 
1.  Adopt a Resolution adopting the Addendum to the Downtown Strategy 2040 Final 
Environmental Impact Report adopted by City Council Resolution No. 78942 on December 
19, 2018, and addenda thereto, in accordance with CEQA. 
2.  Adopt a Resolution amending the Envision San José 2040 General Plan Land 
Use/Transportation Diagram designation (APN’s 264-20-086, 264-20-087, and 264-20-088) 
from Residential Neighborhood to Downtown on approximately 19,200-gross square feet of 
the total 39,130-square foot Project Site. 
3.  Approve an Ordinance rezoning the Project Site as follows: 
 
 HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
January 4, 2021 
Subject: File No. GP19-012, C19-042, CP20-019 & T20-020 
Page 2 
 
o  From the LI Light Industrial Zoning District to the DC Downtown Primary 
Commercial Zoning District on approximately 13,179-gross square feet (APN’s 264-
20-082, 264-20-083, and 264-20-084), and 
o  From the R-2 Two-Family Residence Zoning District to the DC Downtown Primary 
Commercial Zoning District over approximately 25,951-gross square feet (APNs 264-
20-085, 264-20-086, 264-20-087, and 264-20-088) of the total 39,130-square foot 
project site. 
4.  Adopt a resolution approving, subject to conditions, a Vesting Tentative Map to merge the 
seven parcels on the Project Site into one parcel. 
5.  Adopt a resolution approving, subject to conditions, a Conditional Use Permit to allow the 
demolition of existing structures and the construction of a mixed-use project including a 190-
bed commercial residential care facility with 116 assisted living residential care guest rooms 
and 49 memory care guest rooms, four multi-family residential units, and a back-up 
generator, including a development exception, on the Project Site. 
 
 
OUTCOME 
 
Should the City Council adopt the resolution adopting the Addendum to the Downtown Strategy 
2040 Final Environmental Impact Report and associated Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting 
Program for the project, approve the Rezoning Ordinance, and adopt the resolutions approving the 
Vesting Tentative Map and the Conditional Use Permit, the project applicant may continue with the 
Public Works clearance and building permit process. 
 
Should the City Council decide to deny the proposed project, the applicant will not be able to 
continue with the Public Works clearance and building permit process. 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
On December 9, 2020, the Planning Commission held a public hearing to consider the Addendum to 
the Downtown Strategy 2040 Final Environmental Impact Report and associated Mitigation 
Monitoring and Reporting Program for the project, Rezoning, Vesting Tentative Map and the 
Conditional Use Permit. The item was placed on the Public Hearing agenda, as members of the 
Delmas Park Neighborhood Association had expressed interest in the project during project review. 
 
Staff Presentation 
Staff gave an overview of the project description and its conformance to the General Plan Land Use 
Designation, Diridon Station Area Plan (DSAP), and the development standards within the proposed 
DC Downtown Primary Commercial Zoning District, and stated that an Addendum to the Downtown 
Strategy 2040 Final Environmental Impact Report was prepared for the project and that the project is 
found to be consistent with the Downtown Strategy 2040 FEIR. Staff recommended the Planning 
Commission recommend to the City Council adoption of the Addendum and approval of the General 
Plan Amendment, Rezoning, Vesting Tentative Map and Conditional Use Permit.  
 
 HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
January 4, 2021 
Subject: File No. GP19-012, C19-042, CP20-019 & T20-020 
Page 3 
 
A letter from the Delmas Park Neighborhood Association was received on December 7, 2020, and 
staff provided written responses to the Commissioners prior to the December 9th hearing. Staff 
provided a verbal correction to one of the responses regarding the referenced Environmental Impact 
Report. Staff clarified that based on recent preliminary analysis by the environmental consultant, the 
CEQA clearance for the currently proposed DSAP Amendment is an Addendum to the Downtown 
Strategy 2040 EIR, rather than a new EIR.  
 
Applicant Presentation  
Paul Ring, on behalf of Urban Catalyst, began the applicant presentation by describing how the 
project will fulfill a regional need for quality senior housing in an urban setting with rich amenities. 
Tim Woloshyn, also with Urban Catalyst, continued with a description and statistics of the need for 
senior housing. He described how the project has been revised based on the neighborhood concerns, 
including reducing the height of the building from 85 feet to 65 feet, relocating the proposed loading 
zone to enter from West San Carlos Street instead of Gifford Avenue, and stepping down the façade 
on the south side of the project along Gifford Avenue for increased compatibility with the one-story 
and two-story buildings south of the project site. 
 
Tim Woloshyn then introduced Thang Do, architect at AEDIS and co-owner of the project site. Mr. 
Do described the design of the site, including special attention to natural lighting, views, and access 
to the outdoors, while located in the urban area of Downtown. He shared that spaces for residents 
and visitors are located along West San Carlos Street with transparent glass to connect with 
pedestrians on the sidewalk. He described the two main entrances, one on the corner and one from 
the parking garage drop-off zone location. Mr. Do explained that the design emphasizes an 
indoor/outdoor connection with a central courtyard and transparency between the internal portions of 
the building into the courtyard, and that there are landscaped decks on every floor to allow the 
residents to enjoy the outdoors.  
 
Public Comments 
Chair Caballero opened the public comment portion of the agenda. 
•  Bert Weaver, on behalf of the Delmas Park Neighborhood Association, stated in reference to 
the letter sent on December 7, 2020, that the decision to recommend approval or denial of the 
project should be deferred until after the DSAP Amendment and the CEQA document are 
formally adopted. He stated that while the project meets the guidelines of the 2014 DSAP, it 
fails to meet the spirit of that plan. He emphasized that in the spirit of the DSAP, new 
development should respect the existing neighborhood following the guidelines defined in 
the Delmas Park Strong Neighborhoods Initiative (SNI) Plan of 2002. He stated that the 
project fails to significantly increase jobs or residences. He also shared that the neighborhood 
has been in active discussion with the Planning Division for over a year regarding the DSAP 
amendment and that it is counterproductive to approve the project prior to formal approval of 
the amended DSAP.  
•  Gabriella Chavez-Lopez, a community leader and resident in the Delmas neighborhood, 
stated that the project should be allowed to move forward since it is consistent with the 
existing DSAP. She stated that she has been involved in community meetings from the first 
meeting. The developer has considered the community’s suggestions and made significant 
 
 HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
January 4, 2021 
Subject: File No. GP19-012, C19-042, CP20-019 & T20-020 
Page 4 
 
updates to the plans. She encouraged the community to be bolder and push forward to meet 
the needs of the growing diverse community. She shared she is looking forward to the future 
of the neighborhood including her son's future in the neighborhood. She said that as an aging 
society, communities need to dedicate critical resources to allow people to live centrally in a 
place that can be accessible by transit for their families and for others to visit.  
•  Jake Lavin, a member of the Delmas Park Neighborhood Association, expressed concern 
about the interface of this project with the existing neighborhood. He stated that the 
residences and businesses in the neighborhood are low-scale with no buildings over two 
stories. He expressed concern with the zero-foot setback line and that street trees will not be 
able to grow since the sidewalk is only eight feet wide. He also shared that there should be 
design guidelines addressing proper interface with existing neighborhoods. 
•  Kathy Sutherland, a member of the Delmas Park Neighborhood Association, stated that the 
site is almost one acre and will reduce the number of housing units and create only 60 jobs 
and zero transit riders within the Diridon Station area. She expressed concern about the 
building height and that approval of the project would add to the housing crisis. She 
requested that the Planning Commission defer the project, so it can be held against the 
standards of the amended DSAP and the amendment to the 2018 Downtown EIR. 
•  Dina Casanova, a Delmas neighborhood resident, requested that the proposed project 
maintain R-2 Two-Family Residence Zoning District setbacks adjacent to Gifford Avenue 
properties. She was concerned that the proposed structures would block visibility of 
oncoming pedestrians from vehicle traffic. She expressed concern that there is inadequate 
parking to accommodate visitors. She also shared that construction-related traffic and parking 
should use West San Carlos Street rather than Gifford Avenue, since Gifford is a narrow 
street. 
•  Sarah Springer, a member of the Delmas Park Neighborhood Association and resident of 
Parkside Condominiums, stated that street trees along Gifford Avenue would be nice, but the 
sidewalk width is insufficient for pedestrians, including those with wheelchairs or baby 
strollers. She stated that although she appreciates that this is housing for seniors, she is 
concerned that it is for-profit housing and is not affordable for seniors. 
•  Lila Gemalos, a resident in the neighborhood, stated that once residents’ concerns are met, 
this is an opportunity for the neighborhood to move forward. She expressed concern about 
parking and suggested emphasizing public transit for staff members and visitors. 
 
Applicant’s Responses 
Regarding the building height, the applicant responded that the 65-foot building is within the current 
DSAP’s height limit and that the draft amended DSAP proposes to increase the site’s height limit to 
110 feet.  He shared that the applicant team has worked with the neighbors’ concerns by meeting the 
existing height limits and stated that their original proposal was at 85 feet in height; additionally, the 
project meets existing setback requirements.  
 
In regard to the adjacency concerns, the applicant responded that the adjacent property to the south is 
an auto repair and painting facility and that the project is not directly adjacent to single-family 
homes. The applicant stated that the draft amended DSAP proposes to increase the height of 
 
 HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
January 4, 2021 
Subject: File No. GP19-012, C19-042, CP20-019 & T20-020 
Page 5 
 
properties located across the street of the project to over two hundred feet, so the 65-foot building 
fits very well within the existing community. The applicant team further shared that they have 
reduced the building’s height through building articulation and by setting back the top floor of the 
south façade along Gifford Avenue to lessen any potential visual impacts on the neighborhood. 
 
Regarding the sidewalk width, the applicant responded that the width is being increased from eight 
feet to ten feet, consistent with the Department of Public Works requirements, and that the wider 
sidewalk will provide room for landscaping pursuant to City requirements. 
 
The applicant explained that the loading was moved to West San Carlos Street to address parking 
and traffic concerns, and that employees and visitors who will drive their cars to the site will be able 
to park in the garage. Further, the project could be a benefit to the community because senior 
housing generates low traffic and requires much less parking than a multifamily residential use, 
office use, or other commercial uses. 
  
Paul Ring shared that the applicant team reached out to the community before submitting the 
Preliminary Review application in 2019, and that they have considered community comments and 
concerns, coordinated with City staff, and as a result have made changes to the original project 
design. Mr. Ring further shared that in the 14 months of project review and community outreach, the 
Delmas Park Neighborhood Association’s December 7, 2020 letter was the first time that the 
applicant team heard that the City’s action on the project should be delayed.  
 
Planning Commission Discussion and Responses 
Commissioner Oliverio asked the applicant how many units were lost by lowering the project height 
by 20 feet from 85 feet to 65 feet. The applicant responded that the original concept was a higher 
intensity multi-family residential project, which would have required a higher parking ratio and no 
senior units. Therefore, the units lost would not be a senior unit to senior unit comparison. 
 
Commissioner Lardinois asked the applicant to clarify how the project’s height changed over time. 
The applicant responded that the height limit is 65 feet, but there are tools that can allow a project to 
exceed those height limits, such as the use of the State’s density bonus, which was initially 
contemplated. Since the community asked that the height of 85 feet be reduced to 65 feet to better 
integrate with the existing neighborhood, the applicant team decided to revise the project to an 
assisted living facility, and therefore no further opportunity to utilize the density bonus was 
available. The stated that they were glad to move forward at the 65-foot height limit based on 
community input. 
 
Commissioner Lardinois asked the applicant if the project changed in response to community 
feedback. The applicant confirmed that the project height was reduced from 85 feet to 65 feet due to 
community feedback. Additionally, the applicant shared that they worked closely with Public Works 
and Planning staff to move the commercial loading from Gifford Avenue to West San Carlos Street. 
The applicant stated that they also modified the southernmost portion of the building facade by 
setting it back on the top floor and articulating the facade architecture to have it blend into the 
neighborhood. 
 
 
 HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
January 4, 2021 
Subject: File No. GP19-012, C19-042, CP20-019 & T20-020 
Page 6 
 
Commissioner Lardinois stated that this process reminds him of the Tropicana Shopping Center 
project, where there was some resident frustration about the City policy itself for allowing that scale 
of development. The Commissioner stated that he was unable to attend the City Council study 
session on the amended DSAP and Downtown West Mixed-Use development proposal due to a 
conflict and asked staff if the changes to the DSAP will be considered by the Planning Commission. 
Planning staff responded that the amended DSAP will be presented to the Planning Commission for 
its recommendation to City Council in Spring 2021. 
  
Commissioner Oliverio made a motion to approve staff recommendation, and Commissioner Casey 
seconded the motion. Commissioner Oliverio spoke to his motion indicting that the Planning 
Commission has considered assisted living projects previously; many of those projects were located 
in other areas of the City with similar heights or taller than the proposed project which is located in 
Downtown and near transit. The Commissioner further stated that there is a huge demand for 
assisted living projects in San José and that the vision for the West San Carlos corridor is to have 
increased development, given its proximity to transit. Additionally, Commissioner Oliverio shared 
that delaying action could potentially “kill” a project when there is no fair reason for a delay. The 
Commission voted 6-0-1 (Bonilla absent) to recommend that the City Council approve the project.  
 
 
ANALYSIS 
 
A complete analysis of the General Plan Amendment, Rezoning, Vesting Tentative Map and 
Conditional Use Permit, including conformance with the California Environmental Quality Act, 
General Plan, DSAP, Municipal Code, City Council Policies, and the Addendum to the Downtown 
Strategy 2040 Final Environmental Impact Report (Resolution No. 78942) are contained in the 
attached Planning Commission staff report and attachments.  
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The Planning Commission voted 6-0-1 (Bonilla absent) to recommend that the City Council adopt 
the resolution adopting the Addendum to the Downtown Strategy 2040 Final Environmental Impact 
Report and associated Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program for the project, and approve the 
Rezoning, Vesting Tentative Map, and the Conditional Use Permit. 
 
 
EVALUATION AND FOLLOW UP 
 
If the resolution adopting the Addendum to the Downtown Strategy 2040 Final Environmental 
Impact Report and associated Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program and the ordinances of 
the City of San José amending the General Plan Land Use/Transportation Diagram designation from 
Residential Neighborhood to Downtown and rezoning the project site to DC Downtown Primary 
Commercial are adopted, along with approving the Vesting Tentative Map and Conditional Use 
Permit, the project may continue with the Public Works clearances and building permit process.  
 
 
 HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
January 4, 2021 
Subject: File No. GP19-012, C19-042, CP20-019 & T20-020 
Page 7 
 
If the resolution adopting the Addendum to the Downtown Strategy 2040 Final Environmental 
Impact Report and associated Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program and the ordinance of 
the City of San José rezoning the project site to DC Primary Downtown Commercial are not 
adopted, and the Vesting Tentative Map and Conditional Use Permit are denied, the project will not 
be able to continue with the Public Works clearances and building permit process. 
 
 
CLIMATE SMART SAN JOSE 
 
The recommendation in this memorandum aligns with one or more Climate Smart San José energy 
and water goals. The project increases the density of new development (60 net new jobs and up to 
190 beds and four new housing units). The project facilitates energy and water efficiency of the new 
buildings by complying with the reduced flow water requirements and the installation of solar panels 
on the roof. The project also facilitates the choice of mobility other than single-occupancy, gas-
powered vehicles, since it is nearby to major transit stops along West San Carlos Street and is within 
0.6 mile of Diridon Station; employees and visitors are anticipated to use transit to reach the project 
site. 
 
 
PUBLIC OUTREACH 
 
Staff followed Council Policy 6-30: Public Outreach Policy in order to inform the public of the 
proposed project. A sign describing the project was posted on the project site on July 30, 2020. A 
community meeting was held on October 1, 2020.  Both the community meeting notice and notice of 
the public hearings were distributed to the owners and tenants of all properties located within 1,000 
feet of the project site and posted on the City website. Staff have been available to answer questions 
from the public, and met with community members as requested to discuss their concerns and 
questions. 
 
 
COORDINATION 
 
Preparation of this memorandum was coordinated with the City Attorney’s Office. 
 
   
 
 HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
January 4, 2021 
Subject: File No. GP19-012, C19-042, CP20-019 & T20-020 
Page 8 
 
CEQA 
 
An Addendum to the Downtown Strategy 2040 Final Environmental Impact Report (Resolution No. 
78942) and associated Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program was prepared for the Delmas 
Senior Living Project by the Department of Planning, Building, and Code Enforcement. 
   
 
  /s/ 
  ROSALYNN HUGHEY, Secretary 
  Planning Commission 
 
For questions please contact Robert Manford, Deputy Director, at (408) 535-7900. 
 
Attachment:  Planning Commission Staff Report 
   
 
 PLANNING COMMISSION AGENDA:  12‐09‐20
ITEM:  8.a. 
 
 
TO:  PLANNING COMMISSION  FROM: Rosalynn Hughey  
SUBJECT:  GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 &  DATE December 9, 2020 
T20‐020 
                        ______________ 
COUNCIL DISTRICT: 6 
 
Type of Permit  General Plan Amendment, Rezoning, ConditionalUse 
Permit, and Vesting Tentative Map 
Demolition  Three residential buildings, approximately 5,150 square 
feet (total nine dwelling units), two residential garages, 
and two commercial accessory buildings. 
Proposed Land Uses  Mixed use project including a 190‐bed commercial 
residential care facility with 116 assisted living guest 
rooms and 49 memory care guest rooms, four multi‐family
units, and a back‐up generator
New Residential Units  4units
New Non‐Residential Square Footage  149,138 square feet
Additional Policy Review Items  N/A
Tree Removals  Seven ordinance sizetrees, 14 non‐ordinance sizetrees
Project Planner  Laura Meiners
CEQA Clearance  Addendum to the Downtown Strategy 2040 Final 
Environmental Impact Report adopted by City Council 
Resolution No. 78942 on December 19, 2018, and 
addenda thereto.
CEQA Planner  Bethelhem Telahun
 
RECOMMENDATION   
Staff recommends that the Planning Commission recommend the City Council to take all of the following 
actions regarding the 39,130 square foot project site on the southwest corner of West San Carlos Street 
and Gifford Avenue (470 West San Carlos Street) (“Project Site”): 
1.  Adopt a Resolution adopting the Addendum to the Downtown Strategy 2040 Final Environmental 
Impact Report adopted by City Council Resolution No. 78942 on December 19, 2018, and addenda 
thereto, in accordance with CEQA. 
2.  Adopt a Resolution amending the Envision San José 2040 General Plan Land Use/Transportation 
Diagram designation (APN’s 264‐20‐086, 264‐20‐087, and 264‐20‐088) from Residential Neighborhood 
to Downtown on approximately 19,200‐gross square feet of the total 39,130‐square foot Project Site. 
3.  Approve an Ordinance rezoning the Project Site as follows: 
o  From the LI Light Industrial Zoning District to the DC Downtown Primary Commercial Zoning District 
on approximately 13,179‐gross square feet (APN’s 264‐20‐082, 264‐20‐083, and 264‐20‐084), and File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 2 of 23 
 
 
o  From the R‐2 Two‐Family Residence Zoning District to the DC Downtown Primary Commercial 
Zoning District over approximately 25,951‐gross square feet (APNs 264‐20‐085, 264‐20‐086, 264‐
20‐087, and 264‐20‐088) of the total 39,130‐square foot project site.  
4.  Adopt a Resolution approving, subject to conditions, a Vesting Tentative Map to merge the seven 
parcels on the Project Site into one parcel.  
5.  Adopt a Resolution approving, subject to conditions, a Conditional Use Permit to allow the demolition 
of existing structures and the construction of a mixed‐use project including a 190‐bed commercial 
residential care facility with 116 assisted living guest rooms and 49 memory care guest rooms, four 
multi‐family residential units, and a back‐up generator, including a development exception, on the 
Project Site.  
 
PROPERTY INFORMATION   
 
Location  Southwest corner of West San Carlos Street and Gifford 
Avenue (470 West San Carlos Street) 
Assessor Parcel Nos.  APNs 264‐20‐082, 264‐20‐083, 264‐20‐084, 264‐20‐085, 264‐
20‐086, 264‐20‐087, and 264‐20‐088 
General Plan and DSAP – Existing  Residential Neighborhood and Downtown 
General Plan and DSAP – Proposed   Downtown 
Growth Area  Diridon Station Area Plan 
Zoning – Existing   LI Light Industrial and R‐2 Two‐Family Residence  
Zoning – Proposed  DC Downtown Primary Commercial 
Historic Resource  N/A 
Annexation Date  March 16, 1911 (Gardner No. 1) 
Council District  3   
Acreage  0.90‐gross acre 
Proposed FAR  4.8 
 
PROJECT BACKGROUND   
As shown on the attached Vicinity Map (Exhibit A), the Project Site is located at the southwest corner of 
West San Carlos Street and Gifford Avenue (470 West San Carlos Street). The approximately 0.90‐gross 
acre site is currently developed with three residential buildings, two residential garages, two commercial 
accessory buildings, and one carport.  Existing access to the site is from three driveways along Gifford 
Avenue.  The commercial accessory buildings and carport are associated with a used car sales lot and 
community garden.  The residential buildings include a total of nine units and approximately 5,150 square 
feet with associated garages. The residential buildings were analyzed by the Housing Department and 
determined as not subject to the Ellis Act Ordinance, and therefore no relocation assistance or other 
restrictions are applicable.  All buildings and accessory structures are proposed to be demolished.  
Adjacent land uses to the northwest are high‐density multi‐family residential, to the north are commercial 
uses, to the east are auto‐related light industrial uses and single‐family residences, to the west is a martial 
arts school, and to the south are commercial and light industrial uses, including a painting company and a 
warehouse.  
On October 30, 2019, a General Plan Amendment, File No. GP19‐012, and a Conforming Rezoning, File No. 
C19‐042, were filed by Tim Woloshyn as representative of Urban Catalyst, on behalf of owner Thang N Do 
Trustee, et al, to change the General Plan Land Use Designation and the Diridon Station Area Plan (DSAP) File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 3 of 23 
 
 
land use designation on three parcels (APNs 264‐20‐086, 264‐20‐087, and 264‐20‐088) from Residential 
Neighborhood to Downtown on approximately 19,200‐gross square feet of the total 39,130 square foot 
project site, and to change the zoning of three parcels from the LI Light Industrial Zoning District to the DC 
Downtown Primary Commercial Zoning District on approximately 13,179‐gross square feet (APNs 264‐20‐
082, 264‐20‐083, and 264‐20‐084), and on four parcels from the R‐2 Two‐Family Residence Zoning District 
to the DC Downtown Primary Commercial Zoning District over approximately 25,951‐gross square feet 
(APNs 264‐20‐085, 264‐20‐086, 264‐20‐087, and 264‐20‐088) of the total 39,130 square foot project site. 
The changes to the General Plan land use designation and Zoning District over the Project Site are in 
compliance with Senate Bill 330 as discussed below. Changing the General Plan land use designation from 
Residential Neighborhood to Downtown would increase the maximum FAR from 0.7 to up to 30, as 
discussed below. 
On June 26, 2020, a Conditional Use Permit, File No. CP20‐019 , and Vesting Tentative Map, File No. T20‐
020, were submitted to the City. The Conditional Use Permit is to allow the demolition of all buildings and 
structures on site, the removal of seven ordinance‐sized trees and 14 non‐ordinance trees, and the 
construction of an approximately 185,000‐square foot mixed‐use project including a 190‐bed commercial 
residential care facility with 116 assisted living guest rooms and 49 memory care guest rooms, four multi‐
family residential units, and a back‐up generator on an approximately 0.90‐gross acre site situated on the 
southwest corner of West San Carlos Street and Gifford Avenue (470 West San Carlos Street).  
Operations of the commercial residential care facility include 24‐hour care of up to 190 residents. Services 
include a shuttle service, meals, programs, activities, and events designed to maximize residents’ dignity, 
autonomy, independence, choice, and safety. For memory care residents, activities are designed to 
stimulate cognitive abilities, while also enjoying passions and hobbies. There will be up to 60 full‐time staff 
members employed by the facility, with a maximum of 36 employees at any time. This facility will be 
licensed by Department of Social Services through the State of California. The Operator and Staff must 
comply with relevant laws and regulations as set forth by the RCFE license needed to operate the 
community, including pre‐employment screening via FBI & DOJ background checks as well as staff 
continuing education and certifications. The four multi‐family residential units will be primarily used as 
staff housing. 
The project also requires a Development Exception for the loading space height to allow the proposed 
twelve feet clear. The Zoning Code requirement is 15 feet clear.  The project is conditioned to restrict 
delivery trucks to Class 4 through Class 6. The applicants will also apply for an on‐street loading space 
along West San Carlos Street via a separate Public Works permit process. See the Development Exception 
Findings below. 
SURROUNDING USES
  General Plan  Zoning District  Existing Use 
A(PD) Planned Development  Multi‐Family Residential and 
North  Downtown 
and LI Light Industrial  Commercial Uses 
Painting Company and 
South  Residential Neighborhood  R‐2 Two‐Family Residence 
Warehouse 
Downtown and Residential  LI Light Industrial and R‐2 Two‐ Auto‐Related Uses and Single‐
East 
Neighborhood  Family Residence  Family Residential Uses 
West  Downtown  CN Commercial Neighborhood Martial Arts School 
 
 File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 4 of 23 
 
 
ANALYSIS   
The proposed General Plan Amendment, Rezoning, Conditional Use Permit, and Vesting Tentative Map 
have been analyzed with respect to consistency with:  
1.  Envision San José 2040 General Plan 
2.  Diridon Station Area Plan  
3.  Municipal Code – Zoning Ordinance 
4.  Downtown Design Guidelines 
5.  Permit Findings 
6.  City Council Policies 
7.  California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) 
Envision San José 2040 General Plan Consistency 
Existing Land Use Designation 
As shown in the attached Existing General Plan Map (Figure 2), the subject site has an Envision San Jose 
2040 General Plan designation of Residential Neighborhood.  
This designation is intended to apply to established, single‐family residential neighborhoods, including 
both the suburban and traditional residential neighborhood areas which comprise the majority of its 
developed land. The intent of this designation is to preserve the existing character of these neighborhoods 
and to strictly limit new development to infill projects which closely conform to the prevailing existing 
neighborhood character as defined by density, lot size and shape, massing and neighborhood form and 
pattern.  
Proposed General Plan Land Use Designation  
As shown in the attached Proposed General Plan Map (Figure 3), the applicant proposes a Downtown land 
use designation in the Envision San José 2040 General Plan Land Use/Transportation Diagram Map. The 
changes to the General Plan land use designation over the Project Site are consistent with Senate Bill 330 
as discussed below. 
The project site is proposed to be within the Envision San José 2040 General Plan designation of 
Downtown and is within an Urban Village.  The Downtown designation is the primary designation for new 
high‐intensity office, retail, service, residential, and entertainment uses in the Downtown area. All 
development within this designation should enhance the “complete community” in downtown, support 
pedestrian and bicycle circulation, and increase transit ridership. The allowable density for this designation 
is further defined within the Diridon Station Area Plan (DSAP). 
The project site is within the boundaries of Diridon Station Area Plan (DSAP), an adopted Urban Village 
plan, and is therefore subject to the land use and design standards established within the plan. The project 
is consistent with the DSAP as discussed further below and is therefore consistent with the Downtown 
General Plan designation. 
The project is consistent with the following key General Plan policies:  
1.  Major Strategy #3 ‐ Focused Growth: The Focused Growth Major Strategy plans for new residential and 
commercial growth capacity in specifically identified “Growth Areas” (Urban Villages, Specific Plan areas, 
Employment Areas, Downtown) while the majority of the City is not planned for additional growth or 
intensification. The strategy focuses new growth into areas of San José that will enable the achievement 
of economic growth, fiscal sustainability, and environmental stewardship goals, while supporting the File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 5 of 23 
 
 
development of new, attractive urban neighborhoods. 
2.  Growth Area Policy LU‐2.1:  Provide significant job and housing growth capacity within strategically 
identified “Growth Areas” in order to maximize use of existing or planned infrastructure (including fixed 
transit facilities), minimize the environmental impacts of new development, provide for more efficient 
delivery of City services, and foster the development of more vibrant, walkable urban settings. 
3.  Commercial Lands Policy LU‐4.3: Concentrate new commercial development in identified growth areas 
and other sites designated for commercial uses on the Land Use/Transportation Diagram. Allow new and 
expansion  of  existing  commercial  development  within  established  neighborhoods  when  such 
development is appropriately located and designed. 
4.  Public Transit Goal TR‐3: Maximize use of existing and future public transportation services to increase 
ridership and decrease the use of private automobiles.  
Analysis for Major Strategy 3, Policy LU‐2.1, Policy LU‐4.3, and Goal TR‐3: The project is within the DSAP 
and is approximately 0.6‐mile from Diridon Station. The project land use would allow a higher intensity 
of development on the subject site consistent with General Plan major strategy, and policies supporting 
focused growth and development near transit. Higher intensity of development near transit maximizes 
scarce land near transit and encourages the use of public transit while reducing vehicle miles traveled. 
Furthermore, the project would facilitate a more intense mixed‐use development in place of the existing 
auto‐oriented used car lot at the site. 
5.  Maximize Use of Public Transit Policy TR‐3.4: Maintain and improve access to transit stops and stations 
for mobility‐challenged population groups such as youth, the disabled, and seniors. 
6.  Social Equity and Diversity Policy H‐1.4: Encourage the location of housing designed for senior citizens in 
neighborhoods where health and community facilities and services are within a reasonable walking 
distance and are accessible by public transportation. 
Analysis for Policies TR‐3.4 and H‐1.4:  The project site is located along Bus Route 23 and Rapid Bus 
Route 523, providing service to Downtown, Blossom Hill, and Mountain View. The site is within 2.5 
miles of O’Connor Hospital and Santa Clara Valley Medical Center, and is within four miles of the Santa 
Clara Senior Center. This development is intended for seniors and would provide close access to transit 
services, health services, and community facilities. 
Diridon Station Area Plan Consistency 
The subject site is located within the boundary of the Diridon Station Area Urban Village and subject to the 
Diridon Station Area Plan (DSAP). On June 14, 2014, City Council certified the DSAP Program Environmental 
Impact Report (EIR) and adopted the existing DSAP. In December 2018, the City Council certified the 
Downtown Strategy 2040 EIR which includes the DSAP area. The DSAP analyzes the expansion of the 
existing Diridon Station and the development of land uses within the 250‐acre Area Plan boundary 
surrounding the station. Development of the subject site would need to be consistent with the goals, 
objectives, and guidelines of the DSAP.  
Within DSAP, the subject site is located in Subarea F of the Southern Zone. The Southern Zone is the urban 
neighborhoods zone consisting predominantly of residential and mixed uses as well as nonresidential uses 
including office, retail, service, hotel, medical, and entertainment uses. Per the DSAP Land Use Plan, Figure 
2‐1‐1, the site is partially within the Downtown land use designation and partially within the Residential 
Neighborhood designation. However, with the General Plan Amendment, the project is proposing to 
amend the designation to be wholly Downtown as discussed above. The changes to the General Plan land 
use designation over the Project Site are in compliance with Senate Bill 330 as discussed below. 
 File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 6 of 23 
 
 
Diridon Station Area Plan Design Guidelines 
The DSAP’s Design Guidelines represent a long‐term vision for the area. Various design aspects are 
discussed in detail below. Pedestrian activity and bike access are key to the development of the Diridon 
Station Area as a vibrant urban destination. High levels of pedestrian activity can be achieved by good 
overall connectivity and an interesting and varying street environment. Wide sidewalks, safe crossings, 
slow traffic, street trees, street furniture, and mid‐block connections all contribute to a walkable and 
bikeable environment. Attributes include: high‐density, active ground floor uses, broken‐up building 
massing and articulated façades at the ground level that respond to the pedestrian scale, as well as small 
integrated plazas and seating areas. 
Design Guidelines Analysis: The project is conditioned to widen the public sidewalks to fifteen feet along 
West San Carlos Street and ten feet along Gifford Street, planted with street trees every thirty feet along 
West San Carlos Street and every twenty feet along Gifford Avenue. The ground floor includes active uses 
such as a resident coffee shop, activity center, wellness center, and salon, and includes substantial 
transparency, which will provide an active sidewalk presence, making the pedestrian experience visually 
interesting. The project would provide the required number of bicycle parking spaces, which will encourage 
employees to use a multi‐modal transportation network. 
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 
The project site is proposed to be located entirely within the DSAP Downtown land use designation per the 
General Plan Amendment. Per the Downtown designation, the project site is allowed up to 15.0 FAR. 
Analysis: The FAR for the project site is 4.8 and is consistent with this requirement. 
Height 
Guidelines are provided on the maximum height of buildings in the Diridon Station Area per Figure 3‐2‐1, 
which indicates a height limit of 65 feet for this area plus an additional 10 feet for roof equipment, 
elevator shafts, stairways, etc. The building height guidelines for the Southern Zone are intended to ensure 
the compatibility of new development with the surrounding relatively low density residential 
neighborhoods. Guidelines in the DSAP discourage taller buildings adjacent to existing single‐family 
residential uses. 
Analysis: The project is adjacent to commercial and light industrial uses. There are no residential uses 
directly adjacent to the project site, but there are single‐family residences across Gifford Avenue from the 
project. For neighborhood compatibility, the project is stepped back at the Gifford Avenue street frontage 
at the southeastern portion of the property to create a common open space balcony facing the street, 
thereby stepping the building height and massing down at this location by one floor to a height of 55 feet 
at the street facade. 
The project consists of one six‐story building, and the maximum height is 65 feet, plus an additional four 
feet to the parapet, as allowed within the Building Heights section on Page 3‐6 of the DSAP. Therefore, the 
project is consistent with the height requirement. 
Retail Requirement 
Per the Land Use Plan, Figure 2‐1‐1, this section of West San Carlos Street is required to have retail 
frontage. This requirement is further detailed in the Plan on Page 2‐11. This requirement is intended to 
provide restaurants and services to residents and workers in the area to reduce the need for driving.  
Analysis: The project is proposing active uses on the ground floor facing the street. The ground floor will 
provide transparency and will showcase proposed active uses including communal spaces for residents and 
visitors, a wellness center, and a salon, among other uses, making the pedestrian experience more visually File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 7 of 23 
 
 
interesting. The proposed uses will be provided for residents, visitors, and workers within the building. 
Therefore, the project is consistent with this requirement. 
Zoning Ordinance Consistency 
The subject site is currently located in the LI Light Industrial and R‐2 Two‐Family Residence Zoning Districts. 
However, the project is proposing to rezone to DC Downtown Primary Commercial, for which consistency is 
analyzed below: 
Land Uses 
Pursuant to the Zoning Code Section 20.70.100, the DC Downtown Primary Commercial Zoning District is a 
conforming zoning district to the Downtown General Plan Designation. The purpose of the Downtown 
Primary Commercial Zoning District is to provide development standards for the property within the 
designated Downtown Area. 
Analysis: The project site is within the stated boundary of Downtown per Section 20.70.100 of the Zoning 
Code. In the DC Downtown Primary Commercial Zoning District, multi‐family residential units and back‐up 
generators are allowed, and residential care facilities can be permitted with a Conditional Use Permit. 
Development Regulations 
The project conforms to the DC Downtown Primary Commercial Zoning District Development Standards, 
beginning with Zoning Section 20.70.200, as discussed below. Building height and FAR are regulated by the 
Diridon Station Area Plan (DSAP) as discussed above. Additionally, per Section 20.70.210 of the Zoning Code, 
the DC Downtown Primary Commercial District is not subject to setback regulations. 
Vehicle Parking: 
The required number of vehicle parking spaces for the residential care facility is 0.75 parking space per 
employee per Section 20.70.100, Table 20‐140 of the Zoning Code. With a maximum of 36 employees per 
shift, this calculates to 27 spaces required. The residential multi‐family housing units require one space per 
unit per Table 20‐210, for a total of four spaces. The total required vehicle parking is therefore 31 spaces. 
Analysis: The project is providing 32 parking spaces in the at‐grade garage accessed by a driveway from 
Gifford Avenue. The project is consistent with the parking requirement. 
Bicycle Parking: 
The project is required to provide one bicycle space per ten employees for residential care facility per Table 
20‐190 of the Zoning Code and one space per four housing units per Table 20‐210. For 36 employees, the 
requirement is four spaces, plus one space for the housing units for a total of five bicycle parking spaces 
required. 
Analysis: The project includes a secure bicycle storage room on the ground floor adjacent to the staff lounge, 
accessible to the street, and a bike rack for short‐term parking along Gifford Avenue, adjacent to the building 
pedestrian entrance. The long‐term storage room has five spaces, and the short‐term bike rack has four 
spaces, for a total of nine spaces provided. The project is therefore consistent with the requirement. 
Loading Spaces: 
This project requires one loading space per Section 20.70.440 of the Zoning Code. The loading space must 
be ten feet wide, thirty feet long and fifteen feet high, exclusive of driveways for ingress and egress and 
maneuvering areas per Section 20.90.420. Alternately, per Section 20.70.450.B, the director may reduce the 
number of off‐street loading spaces based on the available loading space within the public right‐of‐way. 
Analysis: The garage does not meet the 15 feet clear height as required by Section 20.70.420 of the Zoning 
Code. An exception is requested to allow twelve feet of height for the loading space, which would allow Class File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 8 of 23 
 
 
4 thru Class 6 delivery trucks. The applicants will also apply for an on‐street loading space along West San 
Carlos Street via a separate Public Works permit process. See the Development Exception Findings below. 
San Jose Downtown Design Guidelines Consistency 
In addition to the DSAP Design Guidelines, as discussed above, the project was analyzed for consistency 
with the 2014 San Jose Downtown Design Guidelines and Standards to achieve an attractive residential 
environment. The project complies with standards of the Downtown Design Guidelines and Standards, 
specifically in the following areas: 
Urban Form and Massing. The massing of a podium level greater than 100 feet wide facing the sidewalk is 
required to be visibly articulated into smaller masses using projections and recesses, materials, shadow 
relief, or other architectural elements (Standard 4.3.1). 
Analysis: The facades at both Gifford Avenue and West San Carlos Street are greater than 100 feet wide. 
The project has provided sufficient articulation in massing along both facades through the use of varying 
colors, materials, and projections and recessions along the façade. The project is therefore consistent with 
this requirement. 
 
Figure 1 – Project Rendering 
Street Wall/Active Frontage 
The base of the building is required to contribute to the vibrancy of the street at the ground level through 
transparency and durable materials. Further, the Guidelines state that building frontage should appear 
safe, welcoming, and open to the general public. Active frontage means transparent to the interior of the 
building. This standard applies to both West San Carlos Street and Gifford Avenue (Standards 4.3.3 and 
5.3.1). 
   File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 9 of 23 
 
 
Analysis: The project design includes transparent glass at ground level along 60% of Gifford Avenue and 
77% along West San Carlos Street. The project provides active uses interior to the site at ground level along 
both street frontages.  The project is therefore consistent with this requirement. 
Architecture and Materials 
Green roofs, high‐quality materials, and a prominent pedestrian entry are required. Specifically, for 
buildings less than 150 feet in height, a green roof or solar panels must cover at least 20% of the roof area, 
the project must use high‐quality materials at the Pedestrian Level, and pedestrian entries must be 
emphasized and clearly identifiable. (Standards 4.4.3, 4.4.7, and 5.5.1) 
Analysis: The project is providing a combination of solar panels and green roof for a total of 20% of the roof 
area. The project is providing materials such as glass, aluminum, concrete, cement plaster, and horizontal 
plank siding. The pedestrian entry is located at the corner of the intersection, and is recessed, framed, and 
labeled with signage to be clearly identifiable. Therefore, the project complies with these requirements. 
 
PERMIT FINDINGS   
Conditional Use Permit Findings 
To make the Conditional Use Permit findings pursuant to San José Municipal Code Section 20.100.720 and 
recommend approval to the Planning Commission, staff must determine that: 
1.  The conditional use permit, as approved, is consistent with and will further the policies of the general 
plan and applicable specific plans and area development policies; and 
Analysis:  As analyzed above, the mixed‐use project including a commercial residential care facility and 
four multi‐family housing units is consistent with the Downtown General Plan Land Use Designation and 
General Plan Policies. The use is allowed within Downtown, the project is providing a FAR of 4.8, a 
maximum height of 65 feet, and active use frontage along West San Carlos Street, consistent with 
requirements of the Diridon Station Area Plan (DSAP). 
2.  The conditional use permit, as approved, conforms with the zoning code and all other provisions of the 
San José Municipal Code applicable to the project; and 
Analysis:  Residential  care  facilities  are  conditionally  permitted  within  the  DC  Downtown  Primary 
Commercial Zoning District. The project is required to have 31 vehicle parking spaces and five bicycle 
parking spaces. The project provides 32 vehicle parking spaces and nine bicycle parking spaces to fulfill 
the parking requirements. The project is also providing one on‐site loading space, subject to the 
development exception contained herein. Therefore, the project conforms with the municipal code 
development standards.  
3.  The  conditional  use  permit,  as  approved,  is  consistent  with  applicable  City  Council  policies,  or 
counterbalancing considerations justify the inconsistency; and 
Analysis: The project is subject to and conforms to the Public Outreach Policy for Pending Land Use and 
Development Proposals. The on‐site sign has been posted at the site since August 25, 2020 to inform 
the neighborhood of the project. A community meeting was held to discuss the project on October 1, 
2020 via Zoom webinar. Approximately 17 members of the public were in attendance for the meeting. 
Comments received during the community meeting and project review are discussed below. Public 
Notices of the community meeting and public hearing were distributed to the owners and tenants of all 
properties located within 1,000 feet of the project site and posted on the City website. The staff report 
is also posted on the City’s website. Staff has been available to respond to questions from the public. File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 10 of 23 
 
 
4.  The proposed use at the location requested will not: 
a.  Adversely affect the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of persons residing or working in the 
surrounding area; or 
b.  Impair the utility or value of property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site; or 
c.  Be detrimental to public health, safety, or general welfare; and 
Analysis:  The project would not negatively affect the utility or value of surrounding properties in the 
neighborhood, as the project would replace a vacant used car lot and low‐density housing. The residential 
buildings proposed to be demolished were analyzed by the Housing Department and determined as not 
subject to the Ellis Act Ordinance, and therefore no relocation assistance or other restrictions are 
applicable. The project operations have been designed to be compatible with the surroundings, including 
outdoor activities primarily oriented to the interior of the site and minimize negative impacts such as 
noise and glare. Although the facility will provide 24‐hour care to the residents, visiting hours and the 
outdoor terrace facing the street will be available from 7am to 8pm.  
5.  The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls, fences, parking and 
loading facilities, landscaping and other development features prescribed in this title, or as is otherwise 
required in order to integrate the use with existing and planned uses in the surrounding area; and 
Analysis: As identified above, File No. T20‐020 was submitted to the City for a Vesting Tentative Map to 
merge seven parcels into one parcel.  The CUP would authorize the development of a mixed‐use project 
including  a  commercial  residential  care  facility  and  four  multi‐family  residential  units  on  the 
approximately 0.90‐gross acre subject site. The subject site is physically suitable for the project because 
all project components are designed within the project site. The site is surrounded by multi‐family 
residential and commercial uses to the north, light industrial and single‐family residential uses to the 
east, a painting company and warehouse to the south, and a martial arts school to the west. The project 
also provides an internal courtyard with open space terraces. 
6.  The proposed site is adequately served: 
a.  By highways or streets of sufficient width and improve necessary to carry the kind and quantity of 
traffic such use would generate; or by other forms of transit adequate to carry the kind and quantity 
of individuals such use would generate; and 
b.  By other public or private service facilities as are required. 
Analysis: The subject site is well‐served by West San Carlos Street and Gifford Avenue, as well as by bus 
routes and Diridon Station. The existing streets and utilities are of sufficient capacity to serve the 
affordable project. All public utilities are adequate as evidenced by the issuance of the Final Public 
Works Memo dated 11/6/20. The project is required to widen the public sidewalks to include street 
trees within the public right‐of‐way. 
As identified above, the project is located within the DSAP and is approximately 0.6 mile from Diridon 
Station. Additionally, bus routes 23 and 523 run along West San Carlos Street, providing local bus 
services to De Anza College, Downtown, Blossom Hill, and Mountain View. 
7.  The environmental impacts of the project, including but not limited to noise, vibration, dust, drainage, 
erosion, storm water runoff, and odor which, even if insignificant for purposes of the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), will not have an unacceptable negative affect on adjacent property 
or properties.  
   File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 11 of 23 
 
 
Analysis: The project incorporates measures to address noise, stormwater runoff, drainage and erosion. 
The project would implement site design measures, such as creating new pervious areas, adding 
landscaping around walkways, sidewalks, and parking spaces, and source control measures such as use 
of efficient irrigation systems, covered trash and recycling containers, and providing an interior parking 
area. Construction noise and any resulting air quality issues will be temporary in nature. All operations 
of the facility will take place indoors, within the interior courtyard area, and on the outdoor terrace. The 
back‐up generator will be located indoors and would not significantly contribute to noise or air quality 
impacts. 
Site Development Permit Findings 
To make the Site Development Permit findings pursuant to San José Municipal Code Section 20.100.630, the 
City Council must determine that: 
1.  The Site Development Permit, as approved, is consistent with and will further the policies of the General 
Plan and applicable specific plans and area development policies. 
Analysis: The project is consistent with this finding, as analyzed for Conditional Use Permit finding 
number 1.  
2.  The Site Development Permit, as approved, conforms with the Zoning Code and all other provisions of 
the San José Municipal Code applicable to the project.  
Analysis:  The project is consistent with this finding, as analyzed for Conditional Use Permit finding 
number 2. 
3.  The Site Development Permit, as approved, is consistent with applicable City Council Policies, or 
counterbalancing considerations justify the inconsistency.  
Analysis:  The project is consistent with this finding, as analyzed for Conditional Use Permit finding 
number 3. 
4.  The interrelationship between the orientation, location, and elevation of proposed buildings and 
structures and other uses on‐site are mutually compatible and aesthetically harmonious.  
Analysis: The subject building provides a 190‐bed commercial residential care facility with 116 assisted 
living residential care guest rooms and 49 memory care guest rooms, and four multi‐family housing units, 
and will be the only structure on the site. The project design includes a modern contemporary architecture 
including aluminum and glass at the ground floor and variations on color, materials, projections, and 
recessions at the podium level, which contribute to an interesting and varied design. The façade along 
Gifford Avenue steps down toward the southern property line to better integrate with the adjacent single‐
story commercial structure. 
5.  The orientation, location and elevation of the proposed buildings and structures and other uses on the 
site are compatible with and are aesthetically harmonious with adjacent development or the character 
of the neighborhood. 
Analysis:  The project would front West San Carlos Street, a Grand Boulevard which serves as an east‐
west connector. The existing neighborhood is a mix of residential, commercial, and light industrial uses. 
The architecture and material of the building are modern and the change in colors and materials provide 
a variation in design and help break up the massing. The façade along Gifford Avenue steps down toward 
the southern property line to better integrate with the adjacent single story commercial structure. 
6.  The environmental impacts of the project, including, but not limited to noise, vibration, dust, drainage, 
erosion, storm water runoff, and odor which, even if insignificant for purposes of the California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), will not have an unacceptable negative affect on adjacent property File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 12 of 23 
 
 
or properties.  
Analysis:  The project is consistent with this finding, as analyzed for Conditional Use Permit finding 
number 7. 
7.  Landscaping, irrigation systems, walls, and fences, features to conceal outdoor activities, exterior 
heating, ventilating, plumbing, utility and trash facilities are sufficient to maintain or upgrade the 
appearance of the neighborhood.  
Analysis:  The landscaping, irrigation systems, all walls and fences, utility, and trash facilities will upgrade 
the appearance of the neighborhood. The mechanical equipment will be behind screening on the rooftop. 
Additionally, the transparent glazing at the pedestrian level will enhance the public street by providing 
activity and adding a vibrant feeling to the neighborhood. 
8.  Traffic access, pedestrian access and parking are adequate. 
Analysis:  The project is accessible to vehicles by a driveway off Gifford Avenue and to pedestrians via 
the main entry on Gifford Avenue at the corner of West San Carlos Street. Thirty‐one parking spaces are 
required, and 32 parking spaces are provided. Therefore, the amount of parking spaces provided is 
consistent with the requirement and adequate for the project. The project is required to widen the 
public sidewalks to ten feet wide along Gifford Avenue and 15 feet wide along West San Carlos Street 
and is required to provide street trees within the public right‐of‐way. 
Development Exception Findings 
To make the Development Exception findings pursuant to San José Municipal Code Section 20.100.1320, the 
Planning Commission and City Council must determine that: 
1.  The exception, subject to such conditions as may be imposed thereon, will not impair: 
a.  The utility or value of adjacent property or the general welfare of the neighborhood; and 
b.  The integrity and character of the zoning district in which the subject property is situated. 
Analysis: The reduced height of the loading space does not affect the exterior of the building or the 
compatibility to adjacent buildings in the surrounding neighborhood. Therefore, the granting of the 
exception for the height of the loading space will not affect the health, safety and welfare of adjacent 
properties or the neighborhood as whole. The project otherwise follows all development standards and 
requirements of the DC Downtown Primary Commercial Zoning District as referenced above.  Therefore, 
the project will retain and promote the integrity and character of the zoning district in which the subject 
property is situated. 
Evaluation Criteria for Demolition  
Section 20.80.460 of the San José Municipal Code establishes evaluation criteria for issuance of a permit to 
allow for demolition. These criteria are made for the Project based on the above‐stated findings related to 
General Plan, Zoning and CEQA conformance and for the reasons stated below, and subject to the 
conditions set forth in this Permit.  
1.  The failure to approve the permit would result in the creation or continued existence of a nuisance, 
blight or dangerous condition;  
2.   The failure to approve the permit would jeopardize public health, safety or welfare;  
3.  The approval of the permit should facilitate a project which is compatible with the surrounding 
neighborhood;  
4.  The approval of the permit should maintain the supply of existing housing stock in the City of San Jose;  File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 13 of 23 
 
 
5.  Both inventoried and non‐inventoried buildings, sites and districts of historical significance should be 
preserved to the maximum extent feasible;  
6.  Rehabilitation or reuse of the existing building would not be feasible; and  
7.  The demolition, removal or relocation of the building without an approved replacement building should 
not have an adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood. 
Analysis: As noted above, the project includes the demolition of all buildings and structures on site. As 
discussed in Site Development Permit Findings 4 and 5, the project is compatible with the surrounding 
neighborhood, and would not have an adverse impact. The demolition would facilitate a mixed‐use 
project including a 190‐bed commercial residential care facility with 116 assisted living guest rooms and 
49 memory care guest rooms, four multi‐family residential units, and a back‐up generator. Re‐use of 
the buildings would not be feasible to implement the goals of the project. Existing supply of housing 
would be maintained through the provision of four housing units and residential care for a greater 
number of people than the current housing on the site provides.  
The changes to the General Plan land use designation and Zoning District over the Project Site are in 
compliance with Senate Bill 330 as discussed below. The residential buildings proposed to be 
demolished were analyzed by the Housing Department and determined as not subject to the Ellis Act 
Ordinance, and therefore no relocation assistance or other restrictions are applicable. 
A Historic Resources Survey and Report was prepared for existing structures within and adjacent to the 
project site by TreanorHL. The residential buildings were constructed in the first decade of the twentieth 
century, but according to the report, none of the properties within the project site, nor the adjacent 
properties within the boundaries of the Area of Potential Effect, appear on any local, state or federal lists 
of historically or architecturally significant structures and/or sites, landmarks, or points of interest. The 
City generally identifies a 200‐foot radius from the project site as the Area of Potential Effect. None of 
the nearby properties within the APE appear to be eligible for the National Register of Historic Places. 
Accordingly, the project will not affect any properties eligible for or listed on any national, state or local 
historical resources register. 
Tree Removal Findings 
Chapter 13.32 of the San José Municipal Code establishes at least one of the following required findings 
must be made for issuance of a Live Tree Removal Permit for ordinance‐size trees. Findings are made for 
the project based on the findings related to General Plan, Zoning Ordinance and CEQA conformance and 
for the reasons stated below, and subject to the conditions set forth in the resolution.  
1.  That the location of the tree with respect to a proposed improvement unreasonably restricts the 
economic development of the parcel in question;  
Analysis: As identified above, seven existing non‐native, ordinance‐size trees and 14 non‐ordinance trees 
will be removed. To construct the project, the trees will need to be removed and replaced at the City‐
required ratio. Based on this reason, and to accommodate the project, the trees proposed for removal 
cannot be preserved. 
Fifty replacement trees at 15‐gallon size or 25 replacement trees at 24‐inch box size are required to be 
replanted.  Pursuant  to  the  project  landscaping  plan,  the  development  would plant  a  total  of  26 
replacement trees at 24‐inch box size, which exceeds the City’s Tree Replacement ratios per the table 
below.  File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 14 of 23 
 
 
Tree Replacement Ratios 
Circumference of  Minimum Size of 
Type of Tree to be Removed 
Tree to be  Each 
Removed  Native  Non‐Native Orchard  Replacement Tree 
38 inches or more  5:1  4:1  3:1  15‐gallon 
19 up to 38 inches  3:1  2:1  none  15‐gallon 
Less than 19 inches  1:1  1:1  none  15‐gallon 
x:x = tree replacement to tree loss ratio 
Note:  Trees greater than or equal to 38‐inch circumference shall not be 
removed unless a Tree Removal Permit, or equivalent, has been approved for 
the removal of such trees.  For Multi‐Family residential, Commercial and 
Industrial properties, a permit is required for removal of trees of any size.  
A 38‐inch tree equals 12.1 inches in diameter. 
A 24‐inch box tree = two 15‐gallon trees 
 
The seven ordinance‐size trees to be removed are of non‐native species, including Glossy Privet, Tree of 
Heaven, White Mulberry, and Peruvian Pepper. These seven trees are required to be replaced at a ratio 
of 4:1, calculating to 28 replacement trees. 
Of the remaining 14 non‐ordinance trees, eight are sized between 19 and 38 inches in circumference, and 
are of the non‐native species Tree of Heaven, Japanese Cheesewood, Olive, London Plane, and Common 
Fig. These eight trees will be replaced at a ratio of 2:1, calculating to 16 replacement trees. 
The final six trees proposed to be removed are less than 19 inches in circumference, and are required to 
be replaced at a 1:1 ratio regardless if they are native or non‐native species. This calculates to six 
replacement trees. The project is therefore required to provide a total of 50 replacement trees at 15‐
gallon size or 25 trees at 24‐inch box size.  
The project will provide 13 replacement trees at 24‐inch box size at‐grade and an additional 13 trees at 
24‐inch box size in planters. Planter details and specifications show that the containers have enough soil 
capacity to prevent stunting growth as the trees mature. Therefore, the project is providing 26 trees at 
24‐inch box size and is consistent with this requirement. 
Vesting Tentative Map Findings 
In accordance with San José Municipal Code (SJMC) Sections 19.12.130 and 19.12.220 and California 
Government Code Section 66474, the Director of Planning of the City of San José, in consideration of the 
proposed subdivision shown on the Vesting Tentative Map with the imposed conditions, shall deny 
approval of a Vesting Tentative Map, if the Director makes any of the following findings: 
1.  That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable General and Specific Plans as specified in Section 
65451. 
2.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable General and 
Specific Plans. 
3.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development. 
4.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development. File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 15 of 23 
 
 
5.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial 
environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. 
6.  That the design of the subdivision or type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems. 
7.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the 
public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. 
Analysis: Based on review of the proposed subdivision, a Vesting Tentative Map to merge seven parcels 
into one parcel for the development of a mixed‐use project including a commercial residential care 
facility and four multi‐family residential units on an approximately 0.90‐gross acre site, the Director of 
Planning of the City of San José does not make any such findings to deny the subject subdivision. The 
project is consistent with the General Plan goals, policies, and land use designation. The project 
complies with the General Plan goals and policies related to Major Strategies, design, and Growth 
Areas, among others. The General Plan land use designation of Downtown allows for higher‐intensity 
projects. The project site is physically suitable for the project and proposed intensity in that the 
development is encouraged and envisioned within the DSAP. Furthermore, the project site does not 
contain historic resources or sensitive habitats or wildlife.  
Additionally, the site is not located within a designated Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA) 100‐year flood plain. The project site, as well as the surrounding area, are currently developed 
with structures and do not provide a natural habitat for either fish or wildlife. The proposed subdivision 
and subsequent improvements are not likely to cause serious public health problems. The project will be 
required to dedicate a ten‐foot wide sidewalk along Gifford Avenue and a 15‐foot wide sidewalk along 
West San Carlos Street, with street trees along both street frontages. 
City Council Policy Consistency 
City Council Policy 6‐30: Public Outreach Policy for Pending Land Use Development Proposals 
Under City Council Policy 6‐30, the project is considered to be a large development. Large development 
projects are required to provide Early Notification by website, email, postcard mailed to property owners 
and tenants within a 1,000‐foot radius, and by on‐site signage. Following City Council Policy 6‐30, the 
required on‐site sign has been posted at the site since August 25, 2020, to inform the neighborhood of the 
project. A community meeting was held to discuss the project on, October 1, 2020 via Zoom webinar. 
Approximately 17 members of the public were in attendance for the meeting. Comments received during 
the community meeting and project review are discussed below. Public Notices of the community meeting 
and public hearing were distributed to the owners and tenants of all properties located within 1,000 feet 
of the project site and posted on the City website. The staff report is also posted on the City’s website. 
Staff has been available to respond to questions from the public. 
Senate Bill 330 Compliance 
Governor Gavin Newsom signed Senate Bill 330, Housing Crisis Act of 2019, on October 9, 2019 to catalyze 
housing that would offset the high rents and home ownership costs leading to increasing homelessness. 
The bill is intended to speed up housing construction in California by decreasing the time it takes to obtain 
building permits and limiting fee increases on housing applications. The bill also bans local governments 
from reducing the number of homes that can be built on properties that allow housing, including 
downzoning, changing general or specific plan land use designations to a less intensive use, reductions in 
height, density or floor area ratio, or other types of increased requirements. The exception to this is that a 
property may be allowed to reduce intensity of residential uses if changes in land use designations or 
zoning elsewhere ensure no net loss in residential capacity within the jurisdiction. File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 16 of 23 
 
 
The proposed General Plan Amendment (GP19‐012) does not reduce the intensity of residential uses 
because the proposed Downtown land use designation allows for greater residential density than the 
existing Residential Neighborhood land use designation. GP19‐012 would increase the residential capacity 
by 353 units. Further, the proposed amendment, if approved concurrently with GP20‐001 (net 69 units) 
and GP20‐002 (net 74 units) would offset reduced intensity of residential capacity for proposed project file 
no. GP20‐003 (loss of 248 units) resulting in no net loss of residential capacity. 
 
CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA)   
The Director of Planning, Building and Code Enforcement prepared an Initial Study in support of an 
Addendum to the 2018 Downtown Strategy 2040 FEIR for the Delmas Senior Living Project, which includes 
a General Plan Amendment to change the land use designation from the Residential Neighborhood 
designation to the Downtown designation, a conforming rezoning from the LI Light Industrial and R‐2 Two‐
Family Residence districts to the DC Downtown Primary Commercial district, and a Conditional Use Permit 
for the development of the proposed project. The Downtown Strategy 2040 FEIR contains sufficient 
information to provide project‐level environmental clearance for certain impacts by including standard 
measures that apply to all projects in San José. The Initial Study did not identify any new impacts beyond 
those analyzed in the Downtown Strategy 2040 FEIR. Therefore, the proposed project meets the criteria of 
an Addendum pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines Section 15164 and 
was completed in compliance with CEQA to reflect the independent judgement of the City. 
The Initial Study identified relevant mitigation measures included in the Downtown Strategy 2040 FEIR for 
potential impacts to air quality during construction, nesting birds, buried and unknown archaeological 
resources, contamination during and after construction, and construction vibration impacts on adjacent 
buildings and businesses. In addition, standard permit conditions are made part of the permit approval. 
These standard permit conditions include best management practices for controlling dust and exhaust 
during construction, tree replacement, compliance with the Habitat Plan, uncovering buried archaeological 
or historic resources and human remains during construction activities, preventing impacts from lead‐
based paint and asbestos during demolition activities, preventing stormwater pollution during 
construction, managing mechanical equipment noise, and interior noise levels. The mitigation measures 
are included in the Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program (MMRP) and both the mitigation 
measures and standard permit conditions are made a part of this permit. 
The Initial Study concluded that the proposed project would not result in a substantial increase in the 
magnitude of any significant environmental impact previously identified in the Downtown Strategy 2040 
FEIR. Therefore, a supplemental or subsequent EIR is not required, and an Addendum to the Downtown 
Strategy 2040 FEIR is the appropriate level of CEQA clearance for the project. 
The Addendum and supporting Initial Study, associated technical studies (in appendices to the Initial 
Study) are available on the Planning Division environmental review webpage at: 
https://www.sanjoseca.gov/activeeirs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 17 of 23 
 
 
 
PUBLIC OUTREACH   
Staff followed Council Policy 6‐30: Public Outreach Policy to inform the public of the proposed project. An 
on‐site sign was posted on the property and a noticed community meeting was held on Thursday, October 
1, 2020. Approximately 17 members of the public were in attendance. Concerns raised during the meeting 
included: 
1.  Gifford Avenue has single‐family residences across the street from the development. Is the proposed 
height appropriate?  
2.  Gifford Avenue is a narrow street and difficult to drive through with cars parked on both sides of the 
street. Can the development restrict parking along Gifford Avenue? 
3.  The developer should consider additional community improvements including the undergrounding of 
utilities and providing pedestrian crosswalks at the intersection of West San Carlos Street and Gifford 
Avenue. 
4.  Gifford Avenue is within the City’s Residential Permit Parking (RPP) program for street parking permits. 
Will the residents of this development be able to apply for and receive parking permits? If so, this 
could potentially cause additional street parking issues in the area. 
Staff also received emails from two community members and a PDF letter from the Delmas Park 
Neighborhood Association. One of the emails from a community member had general concerns about the 
project, but did not mention anything specifically, and the other email was from a community member 
who was writing as a representative of the Neighborhood Association and was the same community 
member who issued the PDF letter to staff.  
In addition to the concerns raised in the Community Meeting as outlined above, the Neighborhood 
Association’s concerns raised during the review process include the following: 
1.  The single‐family homes in the area reflect the historic nature of the area. The building architecture of 
the project should be more compatible with the single‐family home architecture. 
2.  Are any parking reductions being applied? 
3.  What is the existing land use designation and zoning district for all lots? Is the proposed development 
required to change to the land use designation? 
4.  What is the existing number of housing units currently on the site? 
5.  What additional reports is the Planning Department requiring for the environmental review? Is an EIR 
required? What is the anticipated date reports will be completed? 
6.  If approved, how many jobs will be created? How many housing units will be created? 
In response to the concerns about height, the applicants revised the project to be six stories from the 
original proposed eight stories. There is no recommendation for number of stories within the DSAP. Per 
Figure 3‐2‐1 on page 3‐5, the height limit is 65 feet. The project is consistent with this requirement. 
However, in response to the community concern, the applicants stepped down the façade along Gifford 
Avenue at the southern boundary to provide a height transition at this location. 
In response to the Neighborhood Association’s concern about the building architecture, there are no 
designated historic residences in the area. Further, this project is replacing a vacant car lot – one of a 
series of auto‐related uses along West San Carlos Street. This neighborhood generally contains a mix of 
commercial and residential uses.  File No. GP19‐012, C19‐042, CP20‐019 & T20‐020 
Page 18 of 23 
 
 
In response to the concern about parking and the RPP street permit parking program, the applicant is 
providing 100% of the required parking on‐site, and since this is an assisted living project, very few 
residents are expected to own or operate vehicles. No parking reductions are being requested or applied. 
The remaining concerns have been addressed within this Staff Report, and all email inquiries were 
answered in a timely manner. 
A notice of the public hearing was distributed to the owners and tenants of all properties located within 
1,000 feet of the project site and posted on the City website. The staff report is also posted on the City’s 
website. Staff has been available to respond to questions from the public. 
 
Project Managers:  Laura Meiners and Robert Rivera
 
Approved by:  /s/                          ,Deputy Director for Rosalynn Hughey, Planning Director
 
 
ATTACHMENTS: 
Exhibit A:     Vicinity Map, Aerial 
Exhibit B:     Existing General Plan Land Use Designation 
Exhibit C:     Proposed General Plan Land Use Designation 
Exhibit D:   Existing Zoning District  
Exhibit E:  Proposed Zoning District 
Exhibit F:  Ordinances and Resolutions (General Plan Amendment, Rezoning, Vesting Tentative Map, 
and Special Use Permit) 
Exhibit G:  Environmental Addendum Resolution and Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program 
(MMRP) 
Exhibit H:  Plan Sets 
Exhibit I:  Operations Plan 
Exhibit J:   Public Correspondence 
 
 
General Plan Project  Development Review  Environmental Project  Applicant Contact 
Manager  Project Manager  Manager 
Robert Rivera  Laura Meiners  Thai‐Chau Le  Tim Woloshyn 
robert.rivera@sanjosec Laura.Meiners@sanjose Thai‐ twoloshyn@urbancatal
a.gov  ca.gov  Chau.Le@sanjoseca.gov yst.com   
(408) 535‐4843  (408) 535‐7869    (408) 535‐5658  (415) 235‐2506 
 
   GP19-012, CP20-019, C19-042 & T20-020 List of Attachments 
 
 
Exhibit A- Vicinity Map, Aerial 
Exhibit B- Existing General Plan Land Use Designation 
Exhibit C- Proposed General Plan Land Use Designation 
Exhibit D- Existing Zoning District 
Exhibit E- Proposed Zoning District 
Exhibit F- Ordinances and Resolutions (General Plan Amendment, Rezoning, Vesting Tentative 
Map, and Special Use Permit) 
Exhibit G- Environmental Addendum Resolution and Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting 
Program (MMRP) 
Exhibit H- Plan Sets 
Exhibit I- Operations Plan 
Exhibit J- Public Correspondence 
 
 
Correspondence Received After 12/2/20