Community Development 

 
 
STAFF REPORT 

City Council  
Meeting Date:  
Staff Report Number:  
 
Regular Business:  

 

 

 
1/12/2021 
21-009-CC 

Approve a budget amendment of $15,000 in below 
market rate housing funds and authorize the city 
manager to execute an agreement with HouseKeys 
Inc. to provide below market rate housing program 
administration services 

Recommendation 
Staff recommends the City Council approve a budget amendment of $15,000 of below market rate (BMR) 
housing funds and authorize the city manager to execute an agreement with HouseKeys Inc. to provide 
BMR housing program administration services through June 30, 2021, including an option to extend the 
agreement for three additional one-year terms. 

Policy Issues 
The City Council must provide authorization to the city manager to enter into this agreement as the cost 
exceeds the city manager’s spending authority. BMR housing program administration services are required 
in order to implement BMR housing programs, services and activities.  
 

Background 
As a result of the elimination of redevelopment agencies in 2011 and the reduction in the housing division 
staff, the city initially outsourced its BMR housing administration services beginning in 2012. Two different 
contractors have provided services, initially by Alta Housing (formerly known as Palo Alto Housing Corp.) 
from 2012 to 2014 and then by Hello Housing since 2014. Due to the increasing cost of annual contract 
services with the current BMR housing program administrator, and to determine cost reasonableness, a 
request for proposals (RFP) was issued.  
 

Analysis 
Scope of work 
The general responsibilities of the BMR administrator include, but are not limited to, the services and 
primary tasks identified in Table 1, which were also identified in the RFP.  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

City of Menlo Park    701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025  tel 650-330-6600  www.menlopark.org 

 

AGENDA ITEM G-4Page G-4.1Table 1: Scope of services 

Primary tasks 

• Provide information and advice to interested persons and housing seekers about the 
City’s BMR ownership and rental programs. 
• Update and maintain portion(s) of administrator’s website pertaining to the City’s BMR 
program.  
• Conduct marketing of BMR ownership and rental programs to ensure a sufficient pool of 
qualified buyers and/or potential renters, as directed by the City.  
• Maintain records and statistics related to BMR ownership and rental units and 
households served, including a permanent database, with contact information, of all 
ownership households, rental units and loan servicing. 

• Conduct an annual eligibility screening of the approximately 150 households on the BMR 
ownership waiting list.  
• Coordinate BMR ownership refinance requests.  
• Conduct annual compliance monitoring of 68 BMR ownership units. 
• Coordinate the sale of new BMR units and resale of existing BMR ownership units.  
• Provide assistance and counseling to BMR owners, in coordination the City staff, to help 
owners resolve financial, occupancy or title matters that can affect the preservation of 
BMR ownership units.  
• Send an informational update to BMR owners annually to keep owners informed of their 
responsibilities under the deed restrictions and distribute other informational materials to 
owners as appropriate or as directed by the City.  
• Conduct waitlist outreach activities to attract qualified ownership households, as needed.  
• Coordinate and conduct homeownership educational workshops, as directed by the City, 
to inform ownership waitlist participants about the Menlo Park BMR ownership program. 
The frequency of workshops over the past five years has been approximately two, as the 
resale of units is rare and new units enter the market fairly infrequently. 

• Notify households on the rental interest list when new and existing units become 
available.  
• Provide annual compliance monitoring of BMR inclusionary rental units on behalf of the 
City for properties within the City’s portfolio, currently 39 units. The City has an 
inclusionary ordinance and this number is expected to increase. This service will exclude 
affordable housing developments with other governmental regulatory agreements.  
• Provide technical assistance to BMR property owners and property managers on City 
policy and regulations. 
• Perform annual income and eligibility certifications for 4 BMR rental units currently owned 
by the City.  

• Provide loan servicing to the City’s loan portfolio of approximately 40 loans.  
• Coordinate loan payments, deferred loans, loan balance reconciliation, compliance 
monitoring and any necessary tax preparations while maintaining professional 
communications with borrowers.  
• Provide monthly or quarterly reporting and loan remittance payment to the City.  

Staff Report #: 21-009-CC 

Services 

BMR program 
administration - general 

Ownership services 

Rental services 

Loan services  

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

City of Menlo Park    701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025  tel 650-330-6600  www.menlopark.org 

 

Page G-4.2Staff Report #: 21-009-CC 

Contractor selection 
On November 4, 2020, staff issued an RFP seeking qualified contractors to provide BMR housing program 
administration services. Given the unique type of services and limited number of contractors, contractors 
were permitted to submit proposals for a portion of the scope of services or the full scope of services 
identified in Table 1, with itemized costs. On November 25, 2020, the city received four proposals from 
nonprofit organizations, with two that included the full scope of services and itemized costs listed in Table 2.  
 

Table 2: Proposals 

Contractor / organization  Annual fixed costs 

Annual variable costs  Total proposed cost 

Hello Housing 

HouseKeys, Inc. 

$135,665  

$85,000* 

$57,815  

$11,250  

$193,480  

$96,250  

*Includes one-time onboarding fee of $10,000, annual fee will be $75,000 after first year. 
 

All proposals were submitted by nonprofit organizations. The two other proposals submitted, including one 
from HIP Housing Affordable Ventures, proposed a partial scope of services and another from Soup 
proposed the full scope of services but was operating in a startup capacity, lacking the experience of the 
two organizations included in Table 2. Staff reviewed and ranked proposals individually. The finalist was 
selected based on a number of criteria including overall cost, experience, capacity, work methodology, 
proposal quality, familiarity with BMR housing program administration services, and references, among 
others. Two other factors considered in the evaluation of the full service proposals from Hello Housing and 
HouseKeys Inc. are the second and third year costs. Hello Housing costs escalate in years two and three 
while HouseKeys Inc. decreases after the first year and then either decreases or remains the same in the 
second and third years.  
Other factors that were considered in the selection included equity, diversity and inclusion. HouseKeys Inc. 
has a diverse range of staff, has in-depth experience working with a diverse range of clients and provides 
bilingual services. A brief description of their organization and key team members is included in Attachment 
A of this report. HouseKeys Inc. was ranked as the top choice when considering all of these factors and the 
proposed scope of work is included as Attachment B. The selection of HouseKeys Inc. for BMR housing 
administration services will result in a significant cost reduction to the city for the same scope of services 
currently provided.  
 
Next steps 
The city will execute an agreement with HouseKeys Inc. and staff will coordinate the transition of services 
from the current contractor. All activities will be conducted remotely and if any on-site customer services are 
required, such as a BMR home resale, HouseKeys Inc. will abide by COVID-19 public health guidelines 
during the provision of services.  
 
The initial agreement with HouseKeys Inc. will be for the term beginning February 1, 2021 through June 30, 
2021. The amount for fiscal year 2020-21 will be prorated based on five months of service, a one-time 
onboarding fee and 15 percent contingency for variable costs. These amounts are listed in Table 3. To 
ensure continuous uninterrupted services, the City would execute an agreement for the next three 
consecutive years with HouseKeys Inc. for approximately $86,250 (annual fixed cost of $75,000 plus 15 
percent contingency for variable costs) for each fiscal year, based on annual budget approval.  
 

 

   

 

City of Menlo Park    701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025  tel 650-330-6600  www.menlopark.org 

 

Page G-4.3Staff Report #: 21-009-CC 

Impact on City Resources 
An additional amount of $15,000 will need to be added to the fiscal year 2020-21 approved budget to cover 
these contract services. There are sufficient available funds in the special BMR housing fund to allocate for 
these expenses.  
 

Table 3: Housing budget fiscal year 2020-21 

Item 

Hello Housing (7/1/20-1/31/21)  

HouseKeys Inc. (2/1/21-6/30/21) 

     BMR contracts subtotal 

Approved budget FY 2020-21 (contracts) 

     Additional budget request 

Total revised budget FY 2020-21 

Amount 

$58,148  

$47,438  

$105,585.50  

$91,000  

$14,585.50  

$105,585.50  

Environmental Review 

This action is not a project within the meaning of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) 
Guidelines §§ 15378 and 15601(b)(3) as it will not result in any direct or indirect physical change in the 
environment.  

Public Notice 
Public notification was achieved by posting the agenda, with the agenda items being listed, at least 72 
hours prior to the meeting. 
 

Attachments 
A.  HouseKeys Inc. entity description and team roster 
B.  Scope of services from HouseKeys Inc. proposal 

Report prepared by: 
Rhonda Coffman, Deputy Community Development Director – Housing 
 
Report reviewed by: 
Justin Murphy, Deputy City Manager 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

City of Menlo Park    701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025  tel 650-330-6600  www.menlopark.org 

 

Page G-4.4Organizational Profile 

HouseKeys Inc  
358 Digital Drive, Morgan Hill, CA  95037 
Main Phone Line:  1-877-460-KEYS (5397) 
Main Website:  www.housekeys.org 
Main Email: programs@housekeys.org 
Web-Based Software Platform:  www.myhousekeys.com 
Primary Contact: Julius Nyanda, CEO/Program Manager 
julius@housekeys.org 
Office Line:  408-684-8202 / Cell: 415-846-8004 

Founding Team and First Client 

The HouseKeys Founding Team was created because of the shutdown of Neighborhood Housing 
Services Silicon Valley (NHS Silicon Valley).  NHS Silicon Valley was the only NeighborWorks-
Chartered member of its kind in the state of California, combining a Fannie Mae Approved Seller-
Servicer of First Mortgages, HUD-Approved Counseling Agency, Licensed Real Estate Broker, 
Treasury-Certified Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI), and Housing Program 
Administrator contracted with several municipal agencies dating back to 2008.  Members of the 
founding team were recruited from South County Housing’s Program Administration Department that 
managed the application and compliance process for income-eligible buyers on their real estate 
development projects.  This uncommon combination of affordable housing experience focused on 
transaction management and homebuilding created one of the most unique teams in the country. 
When you pair that capability with a software development team, there is a real opportunity for 
government agencies to consolidate their affordable housing programming on a platform that enables 
the standardization and scale needed to meaningfully impact supply and increase public participation.  

Founding Tea Member 
Mandy Israde 
Julius Nyanda 
Kathie Wells 
Christina Enriquez 
Total Individual Years of Experience 
Total Collaborative Years of Experience 

# of Years in Housing 
2000, 20 Years 
2008, 12 Years 
2011, 9 Years 
2013, 7 Years 
48 Years 
40 Years 

HouseKeys first contract was with the City of Morgan Hill to manage their ownership program.  This 
40-Year old program with 568 ownership units spread out over 84 subdivisions, has a unique set of
restrictive covenant agreements, compliance requirements and resale calculations.  HouseKeys
spent the first year of its existence, onsite at City Hall, and working alongside Staff to forensically
analyze the inventory and modernize the program. This work not only involved the Housing Team, but
team members in Finance, Legal, the Clerk’s Office, and the City Manager’s Office.  As HouseKeys
expanded, it continually incorporated lessons learned to develop best practices and to professionalize
the program administration field.

356 Digital Drive | Morgan Hill, CA  95037 | Phone:  1-877-460-KEYS | www.housekeys.org 
Page 1 of 2 

ATTACHMENT APage G-4.5 
Our Team Roster 
 

Position 
Program Manager 

Assistant Program 
Manager 

Program Asset 
Manager 

Assistant Asset 
Manager & Broker 
of Record 
Program 
Operations 
Coordinator 
Program 
Underwriter, 
Compliance 
Manager 
Program 
Accountant and 
Analyst 

Real Estate Project 
Manager 

Program 
Operations 
Manager 

Technology 
Manager & 
Database Engineer 

Software 
Engineering 
Server 
Administrator & API 
Engineer 
Infrastructure 
Consultant 
Software 
Engineering 

 

Role 
Oversight of the 
Organization & 
Program 
Program Education, 
Partnerships, 
Reporting, 
Escalations 
Transactions, 
Program Inventory & 
Compliance 
Marketing, Resales, 
Community 
Relations 
Ticket Handling, 
Application Prep, 
Lender Onboarding 
Applicant Eligibility 
and Participant 
Compliance 

Accounting, Loan 
Servicing, and 
Program Support 
Projects 
Rehab/Remodel 
projects and site 
inspection for BMR 
Units under 
construction 
Workflow Design, 
Agency Onboarding,  
Software 
Implementation 
Management 
Design and 
Implementation of 
Data Model, 
Database & Initial 
Prototype 
Interface and Full 
Stack Development 
Security and 
Infrastructure 

Security and 
Infrastructure 
Server-Side 
Development 

 

Name 
Julius Nyanda 

Phone 
408-684-8202 

Email 
julius@housekeys.org 

Abraham Valle 

408-684-0769 

abraham@housekeys.org 

Christina Enriquez 

408-684-8788 

christina@housekeys.org 

Katarina Marusic 

408-684-8291 

katarina@housekeys.org 

Kamala Loving 

408-684-8364 

kamala@housekeys.org 

Kathie Wells 

408-684-8831 

Kathie@housekeys.org  

Angelica Garcia 

N/A 

angelica@housekeys.org  

John Ash 

408-592-7884 

john@housekeys.org  

Mandy Israde 

408-684-8830 

mandy@housekeys.org 

N/A 

bobby@housekeys.org  

Everett Bobby 
Gasper 

Kunal Bohra 

Frank Adams 

Consultant 1  

Consultant 2 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

kunal@housekeys.org  

frank@housekeys.org  

tech@housekeys.org  

tech@housekeys.org  

356 Digital Drive | Morgan Hill, CA  95037 | Phone:  1-877-460-KEYS | www.housekeys.org 
Page 2 of 2 

Page G-4.6HouseKeys Scope of Services 2020-2021 
Ownership / Rental / Finance Program Administration 

This Scope of Services (“Scope”) details the roles and responsibilities that HouseKeys 
serves for its Clients.  As a Third-Party Program Administrator (“Administrator”), 
HouseKeys is the Agency’s interface with industry practitioners and the public. This 
ecosystem not only includes Applicants (e.g. buyers, renters) and Program Participants 
(e.g. owners, tenants) - it also includes, but isn’t limited to project owners, property 
managers, mortgage lenders, real estate agents, and escrow/title officers.  

$75,000 Base plus Per-Unit Fee Above 150 Units 

HouseKeys prices each contract with a base fee of $75,000 and then evaluates the # of 
Units, City Size, Budget, and other factors to determine a per-unit fee for all existing 
units above a 150-Unit Threshold. A “Unit” is considered an ownership, rental, or 
finance resource allocated to an eligible household.  For example, if an Agency had 200 
Units, HouseKeys could price out the contract at $75,000 plus $500 per Unit.  Total cost 
would come to $75,000 plus $25,000 (the Charge for Units 151-200) totaling $100,000 
per year. Note:  Rental Units are priced differently from Ownership Units. 

Transaction Fees 

In addition to the base cost above, Transaction Fees are charged in accordance with an 
annual Fee Schedule.  Please note that Transaction Fees are typically charged to third 
parties at the point-of-service (e.g. New Construction Fees are charged to the 
Developer for delivering an eligible buyer and as part of their contribution to ongoing 
compliance costs).  HouseKeys uses these fees to cover marketing costs and to 
compensate third parties for services performed, including HUD-Approved Counseling 
Agencies and outside Real Estate Agents. 

Onboarding 

In addition to the base cost and fee schedule, there is an Onboarding Process that can 
take between 30 days and 6 months. Onboarding costs and timelines depend on 
Agency-specific Scope of Work.  While HouseKeys does its best to accurately price its 
contracts, experience has shown that it takes 12 to 18 months of working as the 
Agency’s Administrator to truly understand and calculate cost and scope.  HouseKeys 
aims to work with Agencies who value standardization and who are willing to defer to 
HouseKeys best practices when it comes to program administration workflows, policies, 
and procedures. Note:  Agencies with an existing Administrator have a lower cost 
onboarding if the Administrator is on our Comparison Guide. 

Page 1 of 9 HouseKeys Scope of Services (Revised November 6, 2020) 

ATTACHMENT BPage G-4.7  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Pricing Philosophy 
 
HouseKeys’ goal is to utilize the standardization and streamlining enabled by its 
software platform to decrease the base cost of program administration over time.  Once 
the Agency Client Roster reaches a critical mass, transaction revenue should 
sustainably cover most costs to deliver services. A combination of service, support and 
software is critical to effective program administration. 
 
Service Breakdown 
 

1.  Documentation. Administrator will administer the program and assure 

Affordability Deed Restrictions are recorded and followed by all parties as 
applicable for each property. 

2.  Support and Education. Administrator will provide offsite support for service 
requests. Orientations and workshops will be held for residents of the Agency. 
Note: In Response to COVID-19 restrictions, content is streamed online via 
webinars and pre-recorded content available on HouseKeys-hosted program 
websites. 

a.  Administrator shall conduct introductory Home Buyer, Renter 

Education/Training classes – Homebuyer/Renter Orientation Classes prior 
to Program application.  A minimum of 6 events will be held each year and 
at least 30 Weeks of Weekly Frequently Asked Question (FAQ) sessions 
will be open to all program applicants and participants. 

3.  Guidelines and Materials. Administrator will regularly update program 

guidelines and program materials in conjunction with Agency staff to reflect the 
Administrator’s administrative process for Program Administration including, but 
not limited to: applications, program pamphlets, rent & resale calculations, 
selection processes, vacancies, sale and resale of units, refinancing requests, 
collection of Agency fees and other applicable fees, and default 
monitoring/resolution process. Administrator’s objective will be to work alongside 
Agency Staff to incorporate “learnings” from the team’s collective history with 
Affordability Programs in California. 

4.  Website Presence. Administrator will maintain an affordability program website 

presence that will link to the Agency’s housing website. 

5.  Performance Measures.  Administrator and the Agency will agree to mutually 

acceptable performance measures for program administration. These measures 
shall be included in the quarterly program summary report. 

Page 2 of 9 HouseKeys Scope of Services (Revised October 22, 2020) 

Page G-4.8  

 

 

 

a.  General Inquiries: Respond within 48 business hours 
b.  Loan Requests: Respond within 48 business hours, Complete requests 
within reasonable time, with weekly status updates for outstanding 
requests 

c.  Orientations: Minimum 6 per year, with more as needed for new 

opportunities 

d.  Rental Vacancies: Fill vacancies within 60 days 
e.  Annual Ownership Monitoring: Provide homeowners 30 days to submit 

recertification packages. Note: multiple collection rounds will extend this 
timeline. 

f.  Annual Rental Monitoring: Provider Property Owners (and Management 
Companies) with 60 to 90 days to submit tenant roles and appropriate 
documents and “test” compliance with a minimum review of 10% to 15% 
of affordable rental units. 

g.  Follow up letters at 60 and 90 days before beginning enforcement 

procedures for non-compliant homeowners 

h.  Eligibility List: Maintain a minimum buyer-to-property and renter-to-unit 

ratio of 5:1 

i.  Application ID issuance: Available online year-round 24/7 with 

troubleshooting issues handled within 2 business days. Manual 
Application ID issuance will also take up to 2 business days. 

6.  Recordkeeping. Administrator shall maintain the Agency’s existing records and 
files through a database-driven information retention and management system 
for the programs. All electronic records will be considered work products that are 
property of the Agency and will be available via data export.  The Administrator 
shall update the Agency’s records quarterly to ensure a coordinated seamless 
record keeping process. The database shall include the following at a minimum: 

a.  For each Program / Former RDA Development if applicable (new and 

existing):  
•  A list of all program units in the development 
•  The date of the program developer agreement 
•  Program units lost, including date, reason for loss, initial sales price, 

resale price, and actions taken 

b.  For each ownership unit (new and existing): 
i.  The address for each ownership unit 
ii.  The level of affordability (e.g., Extremely Low, Very Low, Low, 

Moderate) 

iii.  The current owner of record 
iv.  The expiration date of the owner agreement 
v.  The last date of recertification  
vi.  The recertification status (updated annually) 

Page 3 of 9 HouseKeys Scope of Services (Revised October 22, 2020) 

Page G-4.9  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

vii.  The original sales price 
viii.  The current resale restriction price 
ix.  Dates of owner turn-over, as applicable 

c.  For each rental unit (new and existing) 

i.  The unit number for each rental unit 
ii.  The level of affordability (e.g., Extremely Low, Very Low, Low, 

Moderate) 

iii.  The current tenant of record 
iv.  The last date of recertification 
v.  The recertification status (updated annually) 

d.  For each affordable housing loan: 

i.  The type of loan (e.g., RDA, CalHOME, BEGIN, FTHB, etc.) 
ii.  The address associated with the loan 
iii.  The current owner of record (this should be the loan recipient) 
iv.  The amount, term, and due date of the loan 
v.  dates of payoff and interest collected, as applicable 
vi.  dates of refinance/subordination, as applicable 
vii.  dates of write-off and amount, as applicable 

7.  Reporting. Administrator shall provide a quarterly program summary report to 
the Agency with the following information. An abbreviated monthly report will 
accommodate each monthly invoice. 

a.  Performance Measures (See #5 above) 
b.  Any Fees Collected, as Applicable 

c.  For each owner unit (new and existing): 

i.  The address for each ownership unit 
ii.  The level of affordability (e.g., Very Low, Low, Moderate) 
iii.  The current owner of record 
iv.  The last date of recertification and current recertification status 

d.  For each rental unit (new and existing) 

i.  The unit number for each rental unit 
ii.  The level of affordability (e.g., Very Low, Low, Moderate) 
iii.  The current tenant of record 
iv.  The last date of recertification and current recertification status 

e.  For each affordable housing loan: 

i.  The type of loan (e.g., RDA, CalHOME, BEGIN, FTHB, etc.) 
ii.  The address associated with the loan 
iii.  The current owner of record (this should be the loan recipient) 

Page 4 of 9 HouseKeys Scope of Services (Revised October 22, 2020) 

Page G-4.10  

 

 

iv.  The amount, term, and due date of the loan 
v.  Dates of payoff and interest collected, as applicable 
vi.  Dates of refinance/subordination, as applicable 
vii.  Dates of write-off and amount, as applicable 

f.  Current list of defaults and pending defaults 
g.  Actions taken to date 
h.  Next steps, including dates 

8.  Services. Administrator will provide the following services: 

a.  Making minor revisions to the Agency’s existing program materials and 

b.  Overall management and implementation of specific program policies, 

legal documents. 

including required reporting. 

c.  Conducting income qualifications including review of assets, income, 

Verifications of Employment, and all other necessary approvals to ensure 
qualification for the Agency Programs (Ownership, Rental, Finance). 

d.  Underwriting program applications in accordance with program 

requirements. 

e.  Underwriting program compliance in accordance to restrictive covenants 

and project-specific program agreements 

f.  Underwriting transaction compliance (e.g. refinances, transfers) to ensure 

they conform with restricted covenants and project-specific program 
agreements 

g.  Preparing all program documents, overseeing proper execution thereof, 

and conducting final program approval reviews. 

h.  Ensuring timely delivery of all necessary documents into escrow, and 

preparing escrow demands and funding requests. 

i.  Preparation of program materials by revising the Agency’s current 

documents. 

j.  Calculating all pay off demands and issuing any disclosures and tax forms 

as required by State and/or Federal Law. 

k.  Calculating the resale value of all ownership program homes as requested 

annually by the County. 

l.  Work with Agency staff to ensure a seamless and coordinated 

development of documents as it relates to the Affordability Program, 
including the Developer application process where Restricted Affordability 
Units are included, reviewing developer agreements, and ensuring that 
affordability requirements are outlined in an Affordable Housing 
Agreement or equivalent document, and any subsequent amendments to 
the development documentation. 
 
Note 1:  HouseKeys recommends that Agency Agencies include 
affordability requirements, the Administrators roles, and any fees related 

Page 5 of 9 HouseKeys Scope of Services (Revised October 22, 2020) 

Page G-4.11  

 

 
 

 

to affordable unit commitments in the conditions of approval to assure 
transparency at the earliest possible point in the entitlement process 
 

9.  Transaction Coordination. Administrator shall act as transaction coordinator for 
all real estate transactions and will provide the Agency with a Fee Schedule.  
Where there is a conflict between the Administrator’s Fee Schedule and recorded 
Agreements (“Legacy Agreements”), Administrator will adjust fees to compensate 
for the difference with the understanding that newly drafted agreements will 
conform to the fee schedule.    

Note 2:  Transaction Fees charged for New Construction Sales are 
considered a single transaction with a partial “side” of the real estate 
transaction to represent the buyer pool.  At a minimum of 5:1, each for-
sale or rental unit requires a pool of applicants to be managed for each 
unit that needs to be occupied. During the resale of an ownership unit, 
there are two sides of the transaction – one for the first-time home seller 
and two for the eventual buyer who completes the selection process.  This 
two-sided transaction has a higher cost as reflected on the HouseKeys fee 
schedule.  This accounts not only for the work involved (eligibility, legal 
timelines, property condition), but also accounts for the legal liability and 
risk. 
Note 3:  Transaction fees charged to homeowners for refinance 
transactions are charged for the time taken to ensure that proposed 
transaction complies with restrictive covenants. This can include a 
refinance with a mortgage lender or other types of transfers as referenced 
in the recorded document (E.g. Divorce, Estates, Inheritance, etc.) 

a.  Administrator will coordinate document transmittals between buyers, 

renters, borrowers, homeowners, tenants, developers, and Agency as 
needed. Administrator will be responsible for ensuring all documents 
submitted for Agency signatures are complete and accurate. Administrator 
will be responsible for making any necessary corrections to documents. 

10. Monitoring, Compliance, and Loss Mitigation. Administrator shall work 

alongside Staff to conduct monitoring to annually evaluate Program Owners’ & 
Renters’ (“Counterparty’s”) compliance with the terms and conditions of the 
recorded deed restrictions and program guidelines including the following: 

a.  Mailing monitoring letters to all the Program units. 
b.  Reviewing in conjunction with Agency staff, Agency or County Assessor 
data to assist in the process (e.g., water utility bills, property records). 
c.  Review Agency’s preliminary monitoring list to identify follow up actions 

required. 

d.  Meet with Agency staff to develop guidelines for acceptable default 

Page 6 of 9 HouseKeys Scope of Services (Revised October 22, 2020) 

Page G-4.12  

 

 

remedies (e.g., allowing rental of Program Units for hardship cases). 

e.  Administrator shall work alongside Staff to investigate and identify cure 

potential program-related defaults including: 

i.  Conduct follow up of those Program Owners, Project Owners, and 

Management Companies (collectively referred to as 
“Counterparties”) who do not submit their compliance 
documentation. 

ii.  Reviewing information on calls from Program Unit neighbors and 

interested parties. 

iii.  Conduct reasonable follow-up investigation to assess potential 

defaults including unit site visits. 

iv.  Scheduled appointments with Counterparties to discuss compliance 

issues. 

f.  For confirmed defaults, provide Counterparties with list of actions needed 
to remedy the default and conduct follow-up to monitoring compliance. 

i.  Maintaining log of actions taken to remedy the defaults. 

g.  For those defaults in which the Counterparties choose not to remedy the 
situation within a reasonable amount of time, Administrator will meet with 
Agency staff to determine the course of action to pursue. Agency 
authorization will be sought for any legal action taken. 

h.  Administrator will participate in legal deliberations at all Staff Levels and 

Council Decisionmakers as needed. 

i.  Agency will provide a list of any current program participant defaults and 

actions taken to date. 

11. Marketing. HouseKeys’ marketing philosophy is driven by a network effect 

approach. Each agency that joins the HouseKeys client base adds value to the 
network.  This improves the feedback loop used to improve services, name 
recognition, program participation, and can lead to economies of scale.  The 
HouseKeys Team wants to deliver this value in aggregate, but also must target 
the Agency’s local residents and community members. This includes targeting 
the least likely to apply and working in compliance with federal laws addressing 
Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing.  

a.  All Materials will include proper fair housing logo and other federal and 

state-mandated disclosures 

b.  Initial Campaign to Introduce HouseKeys to key employers, community 
organizations, religious organizations, trade associations, and small 
businesses 

c.   Mailers and other collateral that go out within a .25 to .5-mile radius of 

each Opportunity listing featured in the MyHouseKeys Platform 

d.  Local workshops targeting the groups above 
e.  Participating in local events as public health restrictions (e.g. COVID-19) 

allow 

Page 7 of 9 HouseKeys Scope of Services (Revised October 22, 2020) 

Page G-4.13  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

f.  Online and Social Media Campaigns to share available opportunities 

g.  Listings on popular websites and real estate aggregators (E.g. Craigslist, 

locally 

Local MLS, etc.) 

h.  When appropriate and when the budget allows, Administrator will 

advertise in local media (radio, print, etc.) 
 

12. Additional Service Descriptions. Administrator will provide the following 

additional services. 

a.  Administrator shall build and maintain a group of qualified and eligible 

Program homebuyers and renters at a minimum Buyer/Renter-to-Property 
ratio of 5:1. For Agencies that maintain an accruing Waitlist based on 
registration timestamp, HouseKeys will assign Application ID using the 
Timestamp and assign a “Legacy Applicant” Preference Assignment. 

b.  Administrator will partner with the Agency to create Program legal 
templates for documents required for signature by the Program 
participants. Administrator shall supply documents that are typically used 
in the Applicable County for residential real estate transactions (e.g. 
purchase and sale, disclosure acknowledgements, addendums, etc.) 

c.  Administrator will maintain a list of approved loan officers and lending 

operations eligible to provide mortgage lending for purchase and refinance 
transactions 

d.  Administrator will maintain a list of approved real estate agents and 

brokers eligible to provide listing services to sellers for resale transactions 

e.  Administrator will maintain a list of appraisers for fair market valuations 

f.  Administrator will maintain a list of escrow officers who are familiar with 

program requirements and transaction compliance 

g.  Administrator will review individual program restrictions for terms and 

requirements as needed including shared equity programs, down payment 
assistance loans and any resale restriction agreements. 

h.  Administrator will prepare Agency staff reports and hold Council Study and 
Closed Sessions to discuss complicated and sensitive program matters. 

i.  Administrator will enter contract with the Agency with the intention of 

adding the Agency to the Model City Project that incorporates Industry 
Best Practices, A Program Database, and a Regional Program Working 

Page 8 of 9 HouseKeys Scope of Services (Revised October 22, 2020) 

Page G-4.14Group. This Project will improve efficiencies and reduce program costs to 
the Agency. 

j.  Administrator will provide training, analysis, and suggested improvements 

to the Affordability Program. 

k.  Administrator will prepare a presentation for Staff and Council Members 

on the Model City Project. 

l.  Special Projects. There will be cases where Administrator will be asked 
to complete a Project that is outside of the contract scope.  If project 
scope and terms are defined in writing, Administrator will agree to 
complete project at a specified billing rate. 

 
Administrator Staffs its Departments in the following Organization Structure 
 
 

Program 
Manager

Assistant 
Program 
Manager

Program 
Operations

Underwriting & 
Compliance

Asset 
Management

Software 
Engineering

Communications

  

 

 

 

 

Page 9 of 9 HouseKeys Scope of Services (Revised October 22, 2020) 

Page G-4.15