8

 

CITY COUNCIL STAFF REPORT 
MEETING DATE: May 6, 2020 
 
PREPARED BY: Donald Larkin, City Attorney 
APPROVED BY: City Manager 
 
REVIEW THE NEED TO CONTINUE THE LOCAL EMERGENCY DUE TO 
COVID-19 RESPONSE AND SHELTER-IN-PLACE ORDERS 
 
RECOMMENDATION(S) 
Review  current  conditions  and  continue  the  March  13,  2020  emergency  proclamation 
due to pandemic response. 
 
COUNCIL PRIORITIES, GOALS & STRATEGIES 
Ongoing Priorities 
Enhancing Public Safety 
Preserving and Cultivating Public Trust 
Advancing Regional Initiatives 
 
 
REPORT NARRATIVE: 
On  Friday,  March  13,  2020,  the  City  Manager/Director  of  Emergency  Services 
proclaimed  a 
to  global  pandemic  (Attachment  1).  This 
proclamation was ratified by the City Council on March 18, 2020 (Attachment 2). Under 
Government  Code  section  8620,  the  Council  is  required  to  review  the  need  for 
continuing  the  local  emergency  at  least  once  every  60  days  until  the  emergency  is 
terminated. 
 
The  respiratory  illness  known  as  COVID-19  has  spread  to  every  continent  except 
Antarctica  and  there are  known  cases  in  more  than  100  countries.  COVID-19  spreads 
easily  though  human  contact,  and  can  cause  severe  symptoms  for  vulnerable 
populations,  particularly  older  adults,  and  individuals  with  underlying  chronic  health 
conditions.  
 
Chronology of Emergency Declarations 
 

2020-2021 Strategic Priorities 
Financial Sustainability 

local  emergency  due 

•  January  30,  2020,  in  response  to  the  rapid  spread  of  COVID-19,  the  World 
Health Organization  (WHO) declared  a  public health emergency of  international 
concern.  

•  January  31,  the  United  States  Secretary  for  Health  and  Human  Services 

declared a public health emergency in the United States. 

•  February 10, Santa Clara County proclaimed a local emergency. 
•  March 4, Governor Newsom declared a statewide emergency. 

Packet Pg. 187

 

8

 

•  March  9,  the  Santa  Clara  County  Public  Health  Department  issued  an  order 
prohibiting  mass  gathering  of  over  1000  people,  along  with  other 
recommendations. 

•  March 11, WHO declared a global pandemic. 
•  March 13, the President of the United States declared a national emergency. 
•  March  13,  Santa  Clara  County  public  health  officials  issued  orders  limiting 
gatherings  of  35  people  or  more.  At  the  same  time,  the  County  Office  of 
Education announced that all public schools would be closed for three weeks. 
•  March  13,  the  City  Manager/Director of  Emergency  Services  proclaimed  a  local 

•  March  16,  Santa  Clara  County  public  health  officials  issued  shelter-in-place 

emergency. 

orders throughout the County. 

•  March 18, the City Council ratified the proclamation of local emergency. 
•  March  31,  Santa  Clara  County  public  health  officials  extended  the  shelter-in-

place orders through May 3, 2020. 

•  April 1, the City Council confirmed its ratification of the local emergency. 
•  April 27, Santa Clara County public health officials announced that the shelter-in-

place orders will remain in effect through the month of May. 

 
Local Emergency Considerations 
 
Staff  recommends  continuing  the  local  emergency  throughout  the  shelter-in-place 
orders.  Efforts  to  reduce  the  spread  of  the  virus  will  result  in  the  disruption  of  City 
programs and  services.  These  conditions  will  continue  to  be  beyond the  control of the 
personnel,  equipment,  and  facilities  of  the  City.  In  addition,  further  spread  of  the  virus 
threatens to impact our provision of essential services. 
 
As  a  part  of  our  proclamation  of  a  local  emergency,  Council  provided  a  temporary 
delegation  of  authority  to  the  City  Manager  to  waive  local  purchasing  requirements; 
increase  the  City  Manager’s  contracting  authority  to  $150,000;  and  recognized  that 
certain  deadlines,  including  requirements  under  the  Public  Records  Act  and  Permit 
Streamlining Act, will not be met. 
 
Any actions taken under this increased authority will be brought to the City Council for 
ratification at the time the emergency is ended. 
 
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT: Inform 
City  staff  took  action  to  inform  residents  and  businesses  of  the  existence  of  a  local 
emergency at the County and City level and is educating the community about available 
resources. 
 
ALTERNATIVE ACTIONS: 
The Council could decide to end the local emergency. 
 
FISCAL AND RESOURCE IMPACT:  

Packet Pg. 188

 

8

 

The fiscal impact of the local emergency is unknown at this time. Proclamation of a local 
emergency may make the City eligible for emergency funds, but it is premature to know 
whether any funds will be made available. 
 
CEQA (California Environmental Quality Act):   
Not  a  Project:  Continuing  administrative  or  maintenance  activities,  such  as  purchases 
for  supplies,  personnel-related  actions,  general  policy,  and  procedure  making  (except 
where the policies and procedures may result in a change to the physical environment). 
 
Specific  actions  taken  under  the  emergency  proclamation  may  be  subject  to  separate 
CEQA  exemptions.  No  such  actions  are  currently  being  proposed.  In  the  event  any 
actions  are  taken  that  could  result  in  a  change  to  the  physical  environment,  those 
actions will be evaluated separately.  
 
LINKS/ATTACHMENTS: 
1.  Proclamation of Emergency 03-13-20 
2.  20-019 Proclamation of Emergency- COVID-19 
3.  08 Presentation 

Packet Pg. 189

