 

January 26, 2021 

New Business 

DATE: 
 
CATEGORY: 
 
DEPT.: 
 
TITLE: 

Community Development 
 
Hotel Acquisition Opportunity to 
Address Housing Needs 

 

 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
That the City Council direct staff to work with the County of Santa Clara to facilitate the 
acquisition and rehabilitation of Crestview Hotel, located at 901 East El Camino Real, to 
meet various housing needs, such as for persons experiencing or at risk of homelessness 
and/or for displaced tenants. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
In October 2021, the owner of Crestview Hotel at 901 East El Camino Real contacted staff 
about whether the City might have interest in acquiring the hotel to help meet various 
housing needs.  The idea came to the owner because he heard about the State’s Project 
HomeKey  program  and  the  City’s  joint  project  currently  under  way  with  LifeMoves.  
Although the application period to the State program had already closed, staff conveyed 
to  the  owner  that  a  hotel  acquisition  could  align  with  and  support  the  City’s  efforts 
regarding homelessness response and addressing tenant displacement. 
 
After  the  initial  discussion  with  the  owner,  staff  conducted  a  preliminary  evaluation 
regarding  the  opportunity.    Additionally,  given  the  City’s  existing  affordable  housing 
project  pipeline  and  limited  housing  funds  available,  staff  held  discussions  with  the 
County about a potential partnership, and the County is very interested.   
 
The following is a summary description of the hotel: 
 
• 
 
• 

Built in 1985. 

67 total rooms: 
 
— 
 

53 one-room suites (280 to 300 square feet each). 

Hotel Acquisition Opportunity to Address Housing Needs 
January 26, 2021 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 

— 

13 two-room suites (450 to 500 square feet each). 

 

 
• 

 
• 

—  One manager’s suite (1,100 square feet). 

80+ parking spaces for hotel and retail. 

Includes six retail pads at approximately 1,000 square feet per pad.  

 
•  All rooms are served by interior corridors. 
 
• 
 
• 
 
ANALYSIS 
 
Meeting Housing Needs 
 
The City has undertaken several efforts to address a wide range of housing needs/issues 
in alignment with the Council Major Goals.  Examples include: 
 
• 

Funding  affordable  housing  projects  through  the  City’s  Notice  of  Funding 
Availability (NOFA) process;  

Partnering  on  projects  to  address  homeless  housing  needs,  such  as  Project 
HomeKey;  

 
•  Developing a strategy to mitigate the impacts of tenant displacement, including an 

acquisition/preservation program; 

Partnering with the County to provide emergency and temporary services for the 
unstably  housed  and  homeless  with  a  local  shelter  capacity,  serving  63  persons 
during the cold weather season; and 

Providing up to five 24/7 safe parking lots serving up to 101 participants. 

 
• 
 
Staff believes that Crestview Hotel presents an opportunity to address two key housing 
needs:  
 
1.  Rapid  Rehousing  for  Homeless  Persons  and  Households.    The  City  has  been 
working on various efforts to address the continuum of housing needs for homeless 
persons.    This  has  included  working  with  the  County  to  develop  a  Citywide, 
programmatic approach to create 200 to 250 units of rapid rehousing (RRH) and/or 
permanent  supportive  housing  (PSH)  as  well  as  partnering  with  LifeMoves  on 
Project  HomeKey  to  provide  100  units  of  interim  housing  for  homeless  persons.  

Hotel Acquisition Opportunity to Address Housing Needs 
January 26, 2021 
Page 3 of 6 
 
 
Project  HomeKey  site  work  is  well  under  way,  and  it  is  anticipated  that  the 
development  will  be  complete  and  client  move-ins  will  begin  by  April  2021.  
However, although there are affordable housing projects in the City’s pipeline slated 
to include some RRH/PSH units, such as La Avenida and Montecito, the completion 
of the first of such units is at least a few years away.  Crestview Hotel could result 
in  the  delivery  of  RRH  much  more  quickly  to  address  the  significant  homeless 
housing needs. 

 
2.  Housing for Displaced Tenants.  Residential redevelopment projects over the past 
several years have led to the demolition or scheduled demolition of over 1,000 rent-
stabilized units.  Evaluating and developing a displacement response strategy is one 
of the Council’s top items on the Fiscal Year 2019-21 Major Goals Work Plan.  As 
part of the strategy, Council has supported the evaluation of a program to acquire 
and  preserve  existing  rental  units  as  well  as  to  work  with  landlords  to  set  aside 
existing  rental  units  they  own  to  house,  temporarily  or  permanently,  tenants 
displaced from their demolished rental units.  These evaluation efforts are currently 
under way, but no programs have yet been established by Council.  In the meantime, 
the acquisition and rehabilitation of Crestview Hotel could result in units to assist 
displaced tenants much sooner. 

 
Partnership with the County 
 
Staff had several discussions with the County about partnering on the Crestview Hotel 
project and has identified some key partnership areas.  The following is a summary of 
the potential partnership roles, should Council approve moving forward with acquisition 
of Crestview Hotel.  Note this is not an exhaustive list due to the still-preliminary nature 
of the discussions, and additional roles may still need to be identified and memorialized. 
 
•  Acquisition of the Crestview Hotel.  Due to limited City funding, it is anticipated 
that  the  County  would  provide  the  funding  for  the  acquisition  using  2016 
Measure A, Affordable Housing Bond (Measure A), funds.  The County has stated 
that acquiring the hotel for rapid rehousing would align with Measure A parameters 
and would be of interest for the County.  Additionally, the County is working on at 
least two other hotel acquisition projects in other jurisdictions and, therefore, has 
experience that would be relevant to the acquisition of Crestview Hotel. 
 
The  County  would  issue  a  Letter  of  Interest  (LOI)  to  the  owner  to  begin  the 
negotiation and acquisition process.  An appraisal and other due diligence would 
be initiated by County, and the County would bring an item for Board consideration 
to acquire the site. 

 

• 

 
• 

funds 

(HOME) 

for  projects, 

that  are  available 

Hotel Acquisition Opportunity to Address Housing Needs 
January 26, 2021 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 
Rehabilitation/Renovation of the Crestview Hotel.  While the City does not have 
sufficient funding to acquire the hotel, it does have approximately $3.7 million in 
Federal  Community  Development  Block  Grant  (CDBG)  and  HOME  Investment 
Partnership 
such  as 
rehabilitating/renovating Crestview Hotel. 
 
The owner has stated he had recently completed cosmetic renovations in the hotel 
and room interiors.  No rehabilitation work was conducted within the walls, and the 
owner is not aware of issues with the existing plumbing, utilities, HVAC, etc.  None 
of the rooms include kitchen facilities.  Examples of what CDBG/HOME funding 
could be used for include: 
 
— 
 
—  System upgrades/rehabilitation, such as plumbing, etc., if needed; 
 
—  Other renovations as needed to make the units suitable for residential use; 
 
—  Site work, such as parking, site access features, etc.; and 
 
—  Soft  costs,  such  as  legal,  environmental  review/remediation  (if  needed), 

Installation of kitchenette/kitchen facilities in each unit; 

planning/permit costs, etc. 

 
The scope of rehabilitation/renovation work will be determined at the appropriate 
time if the acquisition is successful.  Similarly, the amount of CDBG/HOME funding 
that  will ultimately be needed will depend on the scope of work.  Based  on very 
preliminary cost estimates for the installation of kitchen facilities, and assuming that 
there are no costly system upgrades that would be needed, it is estimated that the 
in  CDBG/HOME  funding  would  be  enough  to  cover  the 
$3.7  million 
rehabilitation/renovation costs. 

Joint  RFP  Process.    If  the  County  successfully  acquires  Crestview  Hotel,  it  is 
anticipated that a joint Request for Proposals (RFP) with the City will be issued for 
the site to its qualified nonprofit developer list.  It is likely that the site would be 
leased 
the  necessary 
rehabilitation/renovations and operate the project. 

the  selected  developer,  who  would  perform 

to 

 
•  Outreach  to  Unhoused  Persons  or  Displaced  Tenants.    The  City  and  County  will 
develop  an  outreach  plan  to  unhoused  persons  or  displaced  tenants  who  would 
qualify  for  the  units  at  Crestview  Hotel.    Note  that  because  this  site  has  on-site 

Hotel Acquisition Opportunity to Address Housing Needs 
January 26, 2021 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
parking available, Crestview Hotel may be a viable option to house those living in 
vehicles. 

 
NEXT STEPS 
 
If Council approves the recommendation to pursue the acquisition and rehabilitation of 
Crestview  Hotel  in  partnership  with  the  County,  the  County  will  begin  the  LOI  and 
negotiation  process.    If  successful,  staff  will  work  with  the  County  to  develop  a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) documenting the City’s and County’s roles and 
will return to Council for approval of the MOU.   
 
Additionally, the City’s Fiscal Year 2021-22 Annual Action Plan will include the use of 
CDBG and HOME funding towards this project, and Council will consider adoption of 
this  plan  in  April  2021.    Once  adopted,  the  funds  will  be  appropriated  via  the  City’s 
budget process and be available for use on rehabilitating/renovating the hotel in Fiscal 
Year 2021-22.  Note that the City recently opened its CDBG NOFA for public services as 
part of the Fiscal Year 2021-22 Annual Action Plan process.  Approximately $340,000 in 
CDBG is available for public service activities to be spent over a period of two years as 
well as $171,000 in General Funds for public service activities to be spent over a period of 
one year.  These funds are in addition to the $3.7 million of CDBG/HOME funding for 
capital projects as recommended in this report for use on the Crestview Hotel. 
 
Finally, public outreach to the community and specifically to the adjacent neighborhood 
will be conducted to seek input on the project. 
 
FISCAL IMPACT 
 
Staff  recommends  using  up  to  $3.7  million  in  available  CDBG/HOME  funds  for  the 
rehabilitation/renovation  of  Crestview  Hotel.    The  County  still  needs  to  successfully 
negotiate and acquire the site, and an estimate of the rehabilitation/renovation scope of 
work and costs still needs to be determined.  If the cost of the rehabilitation/renovation 
is less than $3.7 million, the remaining funds may be used for other projects. 
 
ALTERNATIVES 
 
Direct  staff  to  not  pursue  the  acquisition  and  rehabilitation  of  Crestview  Hotel  in 
partnership with the County. 
 

Hotel Acquisition Opportunity to Address Housing Needs 
January 26, 2021 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 

PUBLIC NOTICING 
 
Agenda posting and courtesy notice sent within a 750’ radius of the hotel. 
 
 
Prepared by: 
 
Wayne Chen 
Assistant Community Development  
    Director 
 
 

Approved by: 
 
Aarti Shrivastava 
Assistant City Manager/ 
    Community Development Director 
 
Kimbra McCarthy 
City Manager 

 

 
 
WC/6/CAM 
821-01-26-21CR 
200719 

