 

 

DATE: 
 
TO: 
 
FROM: 
 

VIA: 
 
TITLE: 

December 1, 2020 

Honorable Mayor and City Council 

Clarissa Burke, Senior Planner 
Aarti Shrivastava, Assistant City Manager/ 

Community Development Director 

 
Kimbra McCarthy, City Manager 
 
365 San Antonio Road  

 
PURPOSE 
 
The purpose of this Study Session is to receive Council input on the proposed project at 
365 San Antonio Road. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
Project Site  
 
The approximately one-acre project site is 
located  at  the  southeast  corner  of  San 
Antonio Road and California Street, and 
adjacent 
and 
office, 
in  San  Antonio 
entertainment  uses 
Center.  Across California Street and San 
Antonio  Road  are 
residential  and 
commercial  uses,  including  two  high-
density  mixed-use  projects  by  Greystar 
and Prometheus that are currently under 
construction.  
 
The  project  site  is  currently  developed 
with  two  small  commercial  buildings 
totaling approximately 9,400 square feet 
and  surface  parking  that  would  be 
demolished with this project.  
 

Figure 1:  Location Map 
 

retail, 

to 

365 San Antonio Road 
December 1, 2020 
Page 2 of 13 
 
 

Project Overview 
 
The project is being called “Phase III” of Merlone Geier’s redevelopment projects on the 
west side of San Antonio Center (SAC).  Merlone Geier refers to the project applicant and 
their existing Phase I and II developments known as “The Village at San Antonio Center.”  
The existing and proposed developments span the entire east side of San Antonio Road, 
between El Camino Real, California Street, and the main entry into SAC at Pacchetti Way.   
 
The  proposed  project  includes  construc-
tion  of  a  new  seven-story  commercial 
building,  with  one  floor  of  ground  floor 
retail  below  six  floors  of  office  use,  and 
four levels of underground parking.  The 
underground  parking 
levels  will  be 
accessed  through  the  four-level  parking 
garage  constructed  under  the  adjacent 
office buildings in Merlone Geier’s Phase 
II  development,  with  no  new  vehicle 
access from the street or project site.  
  
The project also includes utilization of up 
to  150,000  square  feet  of  development 
rights  from  the  Los  Altos  School  District 
(LASD)  Transfer  of  Development  Rights 
(TDR)  Program  and  Precise  Plan  Amendments  to  the  San  Antonio  Precise  Plan  to 
accommodate the additional TDR office area in this location. 
 
In order to fit all the LASD TDRs on the site (150,000 square feet), the project maximizes 
the building’s footprint, building to the sidewalk along three sides—San Antonio Road, 
California Street, and Silicon Way—with limited upper-floor step-backs on the sixth and 
seventh stories fronting San Antonio Road and California Street.  Along the Promenade 
(east side), the two bottom floors are stepped in significantly to create a breezeway where 
a standalone single-story retail “jewel box” building is placed.  The project’s open space 
is primarily located on private balconies facing California Street and San Antonio Road. 
 

Figure 2: San Antonio Village Map 

365 San Antonio Road 
December 1, 2020 
Page 3 of 13 
 
 

 
Figure 3:  Illustrative Site Plan 

 

 
Prior Meetings and Hearings 
 
Gatekeeper Authorization 
 
In December 2019, the City Council authorized staff resources  for the consideration of 
amendments to the San Antonio Precise Plan and utilization of up to 150,000 square feet 
of  development  rights  from  the  Los  Altos  School  District  (LASD)  Transferred 
Development Rights (TDR) Program (see Attachment 1:  December 3, 2019 City Council 
Report). 
 
Development Review Committee 
 
On  October  21,  2020,  the  Development  Review  Committee  (DRC)  provided  initial 
direction  on  the  site  plan  and  architectural  design  of  the  proposed  project.    The  DRC 
provided  comments  focused  on  improving  pedestrian  experience,  massing  and 
materials,  key  corners,  and  the  relationship  to  surrounding  buildings.    Key  high-level 
direction of the DRC is expanded upon in the Project Design section below. Given the 
short timeline between the DRC meeting and the Environmental Planning Commission 
(EPC) Study Session, the comments given by the DRC have not yet been addressed in the 
project plans.   
 

365 San Antonio Road 
December 1, 2020 
Page 4 of 13 
 
 

Environmental Planning Commission Study Session 
 
On November 18, 2020, the project was presented for EPC feedback at a Study Session.  
The EPC provided direction on project design and parking.  The direction of the EPC is 
summarized in the discussion below. 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
Precise Plan Amendment 
 
Amendments to the San Antonio Precise Plan (SAPP) will be needed to implement the 
TDR project.  Specifically, the SAPP caps net new office development at 600,000 square 
feet, of which up to 400,000 square feet of net new office development may occur within 
the Northwest San Antonio (NWSAC) Master Plan Area where the project site is located.   
 
Approximately 380,900 square feet of net new office area remain to be developed under 
the  SAPP  office  development  cap,  including  around  39,000  square  feet  within  the 
NWSAC Master Plan Area.  The project proposes to build approximately 167,000 square 
feet of office area. 
 
The  proposed  project  will  require  a  Precise  Plan  Amendment  to  remove  the  400,000 
square foot limitation on office area in the NWSAC Master Plan Area, allowing the project 
to utilize remaining office development cap area from elsewhere in the SAPP area and 
update  SAPP  TDR  Program language.  If the proposed request is approved and built, 
approximately  214,000  square  feet  of  additional  office  development  would  be  feasible 
elsewhere in the SAPP area.  
 
Council considered whether to authorize this project’s Gatekeeper application, including 
the proposed increase in office area, on two occasions.  At the first Gatekeeper hearing in 
September  2019,  Council  denied  the  request  for  authorization,  citing  the  monolithic 
nature of the design as one of the deciding factors, among other concerns.  In December 
2019, the applicant received authorization to proceed with the current project proposal.  
Council was supportive of the proposed office area and Precise Plan Amendment. 
 
SAPP and General Plan Compliance  
 
The General Plan Land Use Designation for the proposed project is Mixed-Use Center, 
which  permits  commercial  buildings  up  to  0.75  FAR  and  eight  stories.    The  proposed 
project  is  also  located  in  the  Mixed-Use  Center  Subarea  of  the  SAPP,  which  permits 
commercial developments with FARs up to 0.75 and heights up to six stories (or eight 
stories/95’ on a case-by-case basis) with provision of public benefits.   

365 San Antonio Road 
December 1, 2020 
Page 5 of 13 
 
 

 
In  order  to  fit  the  additional  area  purchased  through  the  LASD  TDR  Program,  the 
proposed  project  is  requesting  height,  FAR,  and  setback  exceptions.    Specifically,  the 
proposed building is taller than the maximum height permitted by the SAPP, does not 
include  required  upper-floor  setbacks  above  the  fourth  floor,  and  does  not  meet  the 
minimum setbacks for all floors.   
 
As the project is part of the LASD TDR Program, Council supported the proposed office 
area and height of the project, which necessitates exceptions to the SAPP development 
standards to accommodate the additional TDR square footage. 
 
Project Design 
 
Building Materials 
 
The  use  of  warm,  rich  materials  and  detailing  can  improve  pedestrian  comfort.    Staff 
believes the north and east facades are more successful in creating a comfortable ground-
floor  experience  as  they  have  a  solid  two-story  massing  differentiated  from  the  upper 
floors (see Figure 4).  The facades facing San Antonio Road and Silicon Way do not have 
a different material application on the base of the building, resulting in a more heavy and 
monolithic feel (see Figure 5). 
 

365 San Antonio Road 
December 1, 2020 
Page 6 of 13 
 
 

 

 

 

 
Figure 4:  View of Northeast Corner 

 
Figure 5: View of Southeast Corner 

 
Staff recommends the design be revised to provide more architectural detail and high-
quality facade material to the entire ground floor of the project to help differentiate the 
base of the project and increase pedestrian comfort and interest, with a special focus on 
the south and east facades.  
 

365 San Antonio Road 
December 1, 2020 
Page 7 of 13 
 
 

Landscape Design 
 
The applicant proposes landscape strips along the streets and some planter boxes at the 
two key corners (California Street and Promenade and California Street and San Antonio 
Road) to protect pedestrian areas from the adjacent vehicle traffic.   
 
Landscaping helps scale and soften building facades, as well as enhance the pedestrian 
activity  areas.    Staff  recommends  the  landscape  areas  be  studied  to  consider  the 
circulation  of  pedestrians  and  make  sure  planters  are  the  appropriate  size,  placement, 
and design.  Of particular concern is the project’s northwest corner (San Antonio Road 
and California Street), where large planters seem to constrain pedestrian movement on-
site and access to the corner retail space.  The DRC also supported the project proposal to 
incorporate  a  sculptural  installation  at  this  corner,  but  recommended  the  planters  be 
revised  to  accommodate  vertical  planting  to  accommodate  increased  pedestrian 
movement. 
 

 
Figure 6: Illustrative Site Plan 

 

 
Building Areas of Special Design Focus 
 
Key Corner:  The corner of San Antonio Road and California Street is the primary focal 
point of the project and a Gateway corner for San Antonio Center as a whole.  The corner 
will  be  predominantly  viewed  by  people  driving  through  the  busy  intersection  of 
California Street and San Antonio Road.  As such, the proportions of the building and 

365 San Antonio Road 
December 1, 2020 
Page 8 of 13 
 
 
design accents are very important.  Staff and the DRC found that the proposed corner 
balconies (as shown in Figure 7) seemed to obscure the strong massing proposal of the 
building corner.  Staff and the DRC recommend the applicant study the proportion of the 
corner  elements,  as  well  as  opportunities  to  create  visual  interest  through  an  artlike 
installation on the building facade and/or an additional complementary feature (e.g., a 
specimen tree planting in the landscape area). 
 

 
Figure 7:  View from Northwest Corner 

 

 
East  Facade/Breezeway:    The  breezeway  and  “jewel  box”  retail  on  the  east  side  of  the 
building  are  key  design  features  that  create  usable  outdoor  areas  for  the  project  (see 
Figure 8).  The standalone single-story retail building within the large, covered outdoor 
two-story  volume  provides  a  unique,  protected  environment  for  people  to  enjoy  the 
outdoors year-round.  This area is an opportunity for special design features and fine-
grain details to create a destination for people to visit. 
 
The  current  design  incorporates  a  large  vertical  massing  element  that  begins  on  the 
ground floor and carries the entire height of the building.  This element is not necessary 
per  the  Building  Code  and  could  be  minimized.    Staff  and  the  DRC  recommend  this 
element be minimized and replaced with other lower-scale that will be more comfortable 
for pedestrians and create synergy with the large plaza located just beyond the site in the 
Phase II development.  Removing or modifying this feature would also better showcase 
the jewel box retail building. 
 

365 San Antonio Road 
December 1, 2020 
Page 9 of 13 
 
 

 
Figure 8: View of the Southeast Corner 

 

 
Southern Facade:  The southern facade is designed as “back of house” with utility rooms 
and loading areas.  This location is acceptable as it aligns with similar areas in the adjacent 
Phase  II  office  building,  and  Silicon  Way  is  the  least  prominent  project  frontage.  
However, staff still anticipates the area will be highly used by pedestrians, and further 
efforts  should  be  made  to  make  the  environment  comfortable.    Staff  and  the  DRC 
recommend the applicant differentiate the base of the project from the upper floors by 
stepping in the first or first two floors to create a wider pedestrian walk zone through a 
partial pedestrian arcade along at least a portion of the frontage.  Staff also recommends 
more high-quality materials be used in the utility areas to help make it a more inviting 
pedestrian environment. 
 

 

 
Figure 9:  Southern Elevation 

 

365 San Antonio Road 
December 1, 2020 
Page 10 of 13 
 
 

Separation Between Structures 
 
The separation between the proposed building and the adjacent Phase II office building 
on Silicon Way is generally less than the space provided between other taller buildings 
in the Phase II development.  This is a staff concern given prior Council and community 
critique  of  certain  narrow  and  pedestrian-unfriendly  conditions  in  the  Phase  I  project 
area.    The  Phase  II  project  review  included  a  lot  of  direction  and  consideration  to 
separating  the  buildings,  modulating  heights,  and  providing  high-quality  streetscape 
design  to  improve  the  pedestrian  experience  and  avoid  creating  discontinuous 
pedestrian connections or a “tunnel” effect between buildings. 
 
There  is  little  ability  to  substantially  increase  setbacks  or  upper-floor  step-backs  to 
replicate strategies employed in Phase II without substantially reducing the use of LASD 
TDR square footage. 
 
Staff and the DRC recommend that further consideration be given to the south setback 
and  massing  breaks.    The  other  building  facades  all  include  some  ground-floor 
articulation  and  differentiation  that  helps  break  the  mass.    The  south  facade  is  placed 
approximately 47’ from the existing Phase II office building and has little ground-floor 
differentiation.  Staff recommends the applicant study pushing in the base of the facade 
to create a small pedestrian arcade along a portion of the frontage.  The inclusion of at 
least  a  partial  ground-level  arcade,  additional  modulation  of  the  limestone  wall,  and 
potentially  stepping  back  the  sixth  floor  to  match  the  seventh-floor  setback  will  help 
create better scale massing and a more comfortable environment for pedestrians to walk.  
A  small  decrease  in  building  area  is  likely  with  the  incorporation  of  some  of  these 
recommendations, depending on their extent and execution. 
 

365 San Antonio Road 
December 1, 2020 
Page 11 of 13 
 
 

 
Figure 10:  East Site Elevation Illustrating 
Separation Between Phase II and Phase III 

 

 
EPC Direction 
 
The  EPC  agreed  with  DRC  and  staff  direction  on  the  project  design  topics  and 
encouraged the applicant to continue to work with staff.  The EPC gave the following 
additional direction: 
 
• 

Study  opportunities  to  increased  landscape,  greenery,  and  trees  in  the  proposed 
project, with a special emphasis on native plants; 

 
• 

Study  ways  to  accommodate  more  bicycle  connections  through  and  around  the 
project site; and 

 
•  Consider installation of artwork celebrating the historic significance of the area as 

the birthplace of the silicon chip. 

 
Council  Question  No.  1:    Does  the  Council  support  the  design  comments  by  the  EPC, 
DRC, and staff, or have any additional feedback?  
 
Parking 
 
The  project  proposes  four  levels  of  underground  parking  and  is  accessed  through  the 
adjacent Phase II underground parking garage located across Silicon Way. 
 
Staff is supportive of the underground parking garage and access through the Phase II 
garage  as  the  design  meets  objectives  of  the  SAPP  to  construct  shared,  centralized 
structured parking and Citywide objectives to limit driveways that conflict with bicycle 

365 San Antonio Road 
December 1, 2020 
Page 12 of 13 
 
 
and pedestrian infrastructure.  In addition, due to the size and constraints of the project 
site, there is not sufficient space to create access on-site to an underground garage. 
 
The SAPP allows for parking reductions for shared uses, proximity to transit, and/or a 
Transportation  Demand  Management  (TDM)  Program.    The  project  proposes  a 
5.5 percent parking reduction across the Phase II and Phase III projects, based on shared 
parking between the uses in the two projects.  In order to receive this parking reduction, 
the  applicant  will  provide  a  parking  study  to  justify  the  proposal.    The  proposed 
reduction for shared parking is below the maximum 20 percent reduction permitted per 
the SAPP.  
 
Staff  is  supportive  of  a  parking  reduction  per  the  allowances  of  the  SAPP,  as  long  as 
proper  justification  is  provided.    The  optimal  route  for  considering  this  reduction  is 
through  analysis  of  a  shared  parking  scenario  between  the  Phase  II  and  Phase  III 
developments.  This will require reevaluation of the parking for the Phase II development 
combined with the Phase III project.  The applicant is also required to provide a TDM 
Program with a minimum 30 percent vehicle trip reduction target. 
 
EPC Direction 
 
The  EPC  agreed  with  the  staff  recommendation  of  support  for  a  parking  reduction 
contingent on completion of appropriate technical studies and a TDM Program.  
 
Council  Question  No.  2:    Does  Council  support  the  EPC  direction  regarding  shared 
underground  parking  and  associated  reductions  between  the  Phase  II  and  Phase  III 
projects? 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
This Study Session gives Council the opportunity to provide input on key project topics 
to guide the applicant and staff in refining the project design through the remainder of 
the  development  review  process.    Staff  requests  Council  feedback  on  the  following 
questions and any other project related comments: 
 
1.  Does  the  Council  support  the  EPC,  DRC,  and  staff  design  direction  or  have  any 

additional feedback? 

 
2.  Does  Council  support  the  EPC  direction  regarding  shared  underground  parking 

and associated reductions between the Phase II and Phase III projects? 

 

365 San Antonio Road 
December 1, 2020 
Page 13 of 13 
 
 

NEXT STEPS 
 
Following this Council Study Session, the applicant will revise the project per DRC, EPC, 
and  Council  direction  and  continue  to  work  through  the  development  review  project 
with staff.  The project is anticipated to return to Council for a public hearing in mid-2021. 
 
PUBLIC NOTICING 
 
The City Council’s agenda is advertised on Channel 26, and the agenda and this report 
appear  on  the  City’s  website.    All  property  owners  within  a  750’  radius  and  other 
interested stakeholders were notified of this meeting. 
 
 
CB-AS/6/CAM 
891-12-01-20SS 
200381 
 
Attachments:  1.  December 3, 2019 City Council Report 
 
 

2.  November 18, 2020 EPC Study Session Staff Report 
3. 

Project Plans 

