 

DATE: 
 
CATEGORY: 
 
DEPT.: 
 
TITLE: 

October 13, 2020 

New Business 

Community Development 
 
School Allocation of 355-415 East 
Middlefield Road Project 
Community Benefits 

 

 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
1.  Upon City receipt of community benefits from the 355-415 East Middlefield Road 
project, commit $1.06 million (Option A-1) or $1.94 million (Option A-2) in the East 
Whisman  Public  Benefit  Fund  to  the  Mountain  View  Whisman  School  District 
(MVWSD)  and  Mountain  View-Los  Altos  Union  High  School  District 
(MVLAUHSD).  

 
2.  Upon City receipt of community benefits from the 355-415 East Middlefield Road 
project, authorize the City Manager to enter into an agreement with MVWSD and 
MVLAUHSD  for  City  funding  for  intended  uses  and  with  timing  and  reporting 
requirements similar to State developer fees, to support new school facilities directly 
serving the East Whisman area (Option B-1) or indirectly serving the East Whisman 
area (Option B-2), and in an amount not to exceed $1.06 million (Option A-1) or $1.94 
million (Option A-2). 

 
BACKGROUND 
 
355-415 East Middlefield Road Project 
 
On May 5, 2020, the City Council approved a 463-unit residential development at 355-415 
East Middlefield Road, in the East Whisman Precise Plan area (Attachment 1—May 5, 
2020  City  Council  Report).    The  applicant  for  that  development,  SummerHill  Homes, 
included  with  their  application  voluntary  offers  for  school  funding,  if  they  or  another 
developer proceed with the project (Attachment 12 to Attachment 1): 
 
• 

SummerHill would provide $4 million in total contributions, to be shared between 
the  City,  MVWSD  and  MVLAUHSD,  of  which  approximately  $2.5  million  is 
required for East Whisman community benefits (used for public improvements in 
the  East  Whisman  area).    This  leaves  approximately  $1.5  million  available  for 

School Allocation of 355-415 East Middlefield Road Project Community Benefits 
October 13, 2020 
Page 2 of 9 
 
 
MVWSD  and  MVLAUHSD,  which  SummerHill  would  voluntarily  contribute 
directly to the school districts (the City has no role in that contribution). 

SummerHill would donate to MVWSD and MVLAUHSD proceeds from resale of 
10,000  square  feet  of  development  rights  transferred  from  the  Los  Altos  School 
District site in  the  San Antonio  area, which were  unused by the development.  If 
these  development  rights  are  resold,  subject  to  market  uncertainties  and  City 
authorization of a landing site, they estimate at least between $400,000 and $750,000 
would be available for MVWSD and MVLAUHSD. 

 
The  City  had  not  yet  adopted  the  Citywide  School  Strategy,  which  would  have 
determined the school funding need attributable to this development.  The City Council 
asked  staff  to  return  after  adoption  of  the  Citywide  School  Strategy  to  determine  the 
amount of the $2.5 million in required community benefits that the City would share with 
MVWSD and MVLAUHSD, based on the identified school funding gap per the School 
Strategy. 
 
Adopted Citywide School Strategy 
 
On June 23, 2020, the City Council adopted Policy K-26, the Citywide School Strategy, 
and a methodology for determining the MVWSD and MVLAUHSD funding shortfall to 
accommodate projected growth in the North Bayshore and East Whisman Precise Plan 
areas (Attachment 2—June 23, 2020 City Council Report).  This “funding gap” was based 
on an analysis of the following:  
 
• 

The  school  districts’  projected  land  and  facility  needs  based  on  20,000  additional 
units; and 

The City’s opportunities to support school district land acquisition through transfers 
of  development  rights  (TDR),  funding  for  shared  facilities,  or  incentives  for  land 
dedication; and 

The school districts’ opportunities for State grants, bonds, developer fees, and other 
funding; and 

The remainder, or “funding gap” when applied across all projected development, 
was  estimated  to  be  approximately  between  $4.08  and  $6.12  per  square  foot  for 
residential  development  and  about  $16.50  to  $19.80  per  square  foot  for  office 
development.  State law does not allow the City to require developments pay an 
additional  fee  to  cover  the  “funding  gap”;  however,  the  information  on  the  gap 

 
• 

 
• 

 
• 

 
• 

School Allocation of 355-415 East Middlefield Road Project Community Benefits 
October 13, 2020 
Page 3 of 9 
 
 
provided  transparency  and  a  common  understanding  for  developers  to  make 
voluntary contributions and help the schools in this effort.   

 
As  a  result,  the  Citywide  School  Strategy  removed  the  discussion  on  a  “project-by-
project” basis and provided clarity about the role played by each of the parties.  Council 
supported that recommendation, but since the Summerhill project was approved before 
the adoption of the Citywide School Strategy, Council requested that staff bring back an 
item  to  discuss  the  potential  to  allocate  some  or  all  of  the  SummerHill  project’s 
community benefit allocation towards the “funding gap.” 
 
ANALYSIS 
 
Options - School Strategy Share of Community Benefits Calculation 
 
Staff  has  developed  two  options  for  the  allocation  of  SummerHill’s  $2.5  million  in 
community  benefits,  with  different  approaches  to  the  “funding  gap”  range  and  the 
uncertainty around the TDR resale.  Both options ensure the schools get some amount 
within the “funding gap” range.  
 
Option A-1—Low Funding Gap, Do Not Deduct TDR Resale 
 
Option A-1 assumes the minimum school strategy “funding gap” amount, but does not 
deduct the estimated TDR resale value.  If the TDRs can be resold, the school districts get 
that amount in addition to the minimum “funding gap” amount.  If the TDRs cannot be 
resold, the school districts get the minimum “funding gap” amount. 
 

SummerHill’s Minimum School Strategy Funding Gap 
(1 x School Fee) 
 
SummerHill’s Contribution Offer 
 
Remainder School Strategy Need 

$2.56 million  

  – 1.5 million 
 
$1.06 million 

 
If  the  City  allocated  $1.06  million  to  the  schools,  $1.44  million  would  remain  of  the 
$2.5 million  community  benefits  contribution,  which  could  be  used  for  public 
improvements in the East Whisman area. 
 
Option A-2—High Funding Gap, Deduct TDR Resale 
 
Option A-2 assumes the maximum school strategy “funding gap” amount, but deducts 
the minimum estimated TDR resale value, to be conservative.  If the TDRs can be resold, 

School Allocation of 355-415 East Middlefield Road Project Community Benefits 
October 13, 2020 
Page 4 of 9 
 
 
the school districts may get more than the “funding gap” amount.  If the TDRs cannot be 
resold, the school districts get slightly less than the maximum “funding gap” amount.  
 

SummerHill’s Maximum School Strategy Funding Gap 
(1.5 x School Fee) 
 
SummerHill’s Contribution Offer 
 
Estimated TDR Resale Value 
 
Remainder School Strategy Need 

$3.84 million  

  -  1.5 million 

-  0.4 million 
 
$1.94 million 

 
If the City allocated $1.94 million to the schools, $560,000 would remain of the $2.5 million 
community benefits contribution, which could be used for public improvements in the 
East Whisman area. 
 
Uses for Community Benefits in the East Whisman Precise Plan 
 
If  the  City  Council  elects  to  provide  community  benefit  funding  to  the  schools,  that 
funding would not be available for public improvements and other opportunities in the 
East  Whisman  area.    Pursuant  to  the  East  Whisman  Precise  Plan,  community  benefits 
may be used for the following: 
 
• 
 
•  Utility improvements1 
 
•  Nonprofit, small business, or neighborhood commercial spaces 
 
•  Open spaces or recreation facilities (beyond park land dedication requirements) 
 
•  Affordable housing (beyond inclusionary requirements) 
 
•  Other mutually agreed-upon community benefits 
 

Transportation improvements1 

                                                 
1  Transportation  and  utility  improvements  will  also  be  funded  by  the  East  Whisman  impact  fee, 
development  of  which  is  under  way.    However,  some  improvements  may  not  have  a  nexus  to  new 
development since they may also serve existing development or may not address an identified impact.  In 
addition, Council may adopt the impact fee at a level below the nexus amount.  Any of these cases create 
need for additional community benefits funding for transportation and utility improvements. 

School Allocation of 355-415 East Middlefield Road Project Community Benefits 
October 13, 2020 
Page 5 of 9 
 
 
Attachment 3 (Community Benefits Estimate Table) shows a preliminary calculation of 
the costs and likely community benefit portions of envisioned projects in East Whisman.  
This calculation presumes that Council will follow the precedent set in North Bayshore, 
and not levy an impact fee on residential uses in East Whisman.  This total need is likely 
at least $70 million to $75 million.  The expected revenue from community benefits over 
the  development  envisioned  by  the  Precise  Plan  is  approximately  $62  million.    Staff 
expects all or nearly all of the expected community benefits revenue to be necessary to 
complete the envisioned projects for the East Whisman area.  Any amount given to the 
schools would be deducted from the City’s ability to provide these improvements and 
would have to be funded through an alternative funding source. 
 
Summary 
 
Staff is seeking Council direction on the final amount of this project’s community benefits 
to  be  allocated  to  the  school  districts.    These  two  options  provide  Council  with  a 
framework to discuss the allocation amount.   
 
Option A-1:  Allocate $1.06 million to the school districts, leaving $1.44 million for other 
community benefits. 
 
Option  A-2:    Allocate  $1.94  million  to  the  school  districts,  leaving  $560,000  for  other 
community benefits. 
 
The City received a letter from the school districts on October 7, 2020, which requested 
the  Council  consider  allocating  $2.34  million  to  the  school  districts  (Attachment  4—
October 7, 2020 School District Letter).  This is equal to Option A-2, without consideration 
of the TDR resale. 
 
Agreement Terms 
 
The City Council may wish to set terms on the funds provided.  These terms may include 
the use of  funds, time  limits and reporting requirements, or geographic requirements.  
Staff does not recommend allocating funds to specific districts; instead, the City should 
allow the districts to determine their own split of the funds. 
 
Use of Funds 
 
Under State law, developer fees may be used for construction/reconstruction of school 
facilities  and  other  costs  attributable  to  the  increased  demand  for  public  facilities 
reasonably  related  to  the  development.    Staff  recommends  that  these  funds  be  used 
similarly, giving school districts the flexibility to use the funds in ways that expand school 

School Allocation of 355-415 East Middlefield Road Project Community Benefits 
October 13, 2020 
Page 6 of 9 
 
 
capacity.  However, developer fees may also be used for the study, administration, and 
adoption of such fees.  Staff does not recommend these funds be used for that purpose 
since these funds are not associated with developer fees. 
 
Time Limits and Reporting Requirements 
 
Under State law, the school district must identify the purpose for which a developer fee 
is to be used within five years of collection, or they must return it to the developer.  If 
they have identified a purpose but have not collected all necessary funds for the intended 
purpose,  they  must  also  identify  when  all  those  funds  will  be  available.    These 
requirements are the same as other impact fees under State law.  Staff recommends that 
these funds have similar timing and reporting requirements as the State developer fee 
since that provides a convenient structure around which to report on the funds.  If the 
school  districts  cannot  find  a  purpose  for  the  funding  within  five  years  of receipt,  the 
funds would be returned to the City,2 and the City can determine whether to reallocate 
the funds to the school districts.   
 
The October 7, 2020 school district letter requested that the Council consider setting the 
beginning of the five-year clock at project building permit, rather than receipt of funds.  
However, community benefit funds would not be provided by the developer until  just 
before the building permit is issued, and would not be provided if the project is delayed 
or suspended.  After appropriation and preparation of agreements, it is very likely that 
receipt by the school districts  will be well after the project’s building permit is issued, 
giving the districts even more time to determine the use of the funds. 
 
Geographic Requirements  
 
Staff has developed two options for where the funds could be spent.  Option B-1 would 
require  the  funds  to  be  spent  to  expand  capacity  at  a  school  directly  serving  East 
Whisman students.  Option B-2 would allow the school districts more flexibility to use 
the funds elsewhere. 
 
Option  B-1:    Community  benefit  funds  are  intended  to  be  used  for  projects  and 
improvements serving the East Whisman area and the City would be limited to using the 
funds to the East Whisman area.  Therefore, one interpretation of “community benefits” 
would limit use of the funds to create or expand capacity in schools that East Whisman 
students would reasonably attend.  Under these terms, school districts would not be able 
to use the funds at a distant school.   
 
                                                 
2 Since this is an agreement between the City and the school districts, the funds would go back to the 
City, not to the developer. 

School Allocation of 355-415 East Middlefield Road Project Community Benefits 
October 13, 2020 
Page 7 of 9 
 
 
Option  B-2:    The  City Council,  however,  could  choose  to  expand  the  use  of  the  funds 
beyond  schools  that  would  directly  serve  students  generated  by  the  East  Whisman 
Precise Plan area.  This flexibility should be on the condition that the funds create capacity 
at  a  school  in  the  East  Whisman  area  through  reasonable  attendance  boundary 
adjustments  over  time.    In  other  words,  the  funds  could  indirectly  serve  the  East 
Whisman area. 
 
The October 7, 2020 school district letter requested that Council select Option B-2. 
 
Summary of Staff Recommendations 
 
Staff recommends the City Council commit either $1.06 million (Option 1) or $1.94 million 
(Option  2)  from  the  community  benefit  funds  to  be  received  and  authorize  the  City 
Manager  to  enter  into  an  agreement  with  the  MVWSD  and  MVLAUHSD  to  provide 
school funding with the following terms: 
 
• 

The  funds  shall  be  used  for  purposes  consistent  with  the  limitations  of  State 
developer fees, except shall not be used for the study, administration, or adoption 
of such fees. 

 
•  A purpose for which the funding shall be used shall be reported within five years of 

receipt, consistent with the requirements for State developer fees. 

The City Council has two options for the geography requirements: 

—  Option  B-1:    The  funds  shall  be  used  to  create  or  expand  schools  that  East 

Whisman students would reasonably attend. 

—  Option  B-2:    The  funds  may  be  used  elsewhere,  if  they  can  indirectly  create 
capacity at schools that East Whisman students would reasonably attend. 

 
NEXT STEPS 
 
Since approval, staff has recently learned that SummerHill has indicated that they are 
unlikely  to  proceed  with  the  project,  which  makes  the  community  benefit  funding 
uncertain.    Staff  recommends  that  Council  should  still  make  a  determination  on  the 
school allocation of community benefits and agreement terms since:  
 
• 

The permits are valid for SummerHill or whoever wishes to purchase them for at 
least another year and a half and potentially longer if a permit extension is pursued;  

 
• 
 
 

 
 

 

• 

 
• 

School Allocation of 355-415 East Middlefield Road Project Community Benefits 
October 13, 2020 
Page 8 of 9 
 
 
This  is  the  last  outstanding  Council  decision  related  to  the  development,  so  any 
future builder or staff will have clear direction on how to proceed; 

 
•  Council  requested  this  decision  item  during  the  recent  Citywide  School  Strategy 
discussion, and taking the decision now will enable a more streamlined discussion 
because the issues are fresh in everyone’s mind and it is the same Council; and  

The  school  districts  were  made  to  understand  that  this  discussion  would  take 
place.  Even if the money doesn’t change hands, the discussion of terms may have 
potentially important ramifications on future school/City agreements independent 
of this project. 

 
If the project proceeds, the funds could be expected in the next year or two, at which point 
the City will appropriate the funds and develop the agreements with the school districts, 
based on Council direction. 
 
FISCAL IMPACT 
 
Providing funds to the school districts would redirect to the school districts $1.06 million 
(Option  1)  or  $1.94  million  (Option  2),  which  would  otherwise  be  used  for  other 
improvements and projects in the East Whisman area. 
 
ALTERNATIVES 
 
1.  Allocate a different amount of community benefits funds to the school districts. 
 
2.  Do not allocate community benefits funds to the school districts. 
 
3.  Modify or identify alternate terms for the agreement to allocate community benefit 

funds to the school districts. 

 
PUBLIC NOTICING 
 
The Council agenda is advertised on Channel 26, and the agenda and this Council Report 
appear on the City’s website.  The developer, property owner, and school districts were 
directly  notified  of  the  meeting.    Other  interested  stakeholders  were  notified  of  this 
meeting via the e-mail notification system for the Citywide School Strategy. 
 
 

School Allocation of 355-415 East Middlefield Road Project Community Benefits 
October 13, 2020 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 

Approved by: 
 
Kimbra McCarthy 
City Manager 
 

 

Prepared by: 
 
Eric Anderson 
Principal Planner 
 
Aarti Shrivastava 
Assistant City Manager/ 
    Community Development Director 
 
 
EA-AS/2/CAM 
899-10-13-20CR 
200022 
 
Attachments:  1.  May 5, 2020 City Council Report 
June 23, 2020 City Council Report 
 

 
 

2. 
3.  Community Benefits Estimate Table 
4.  October 7, 2020 School District Letter 

