















































 

 TO: HONORABLE MAYOR FROM: Kerrie Romanow  

  AND CITY COUNCIL 

   

SUBJECT: SEE BELOW  DATE: June 14, 2021  

              
Approved       Date 

           6/17/2021    
 

COUNCIL DISTRICT:  4 

 

SUBJECT:  ADOPTION OF THE MITIGATED NEGATIVE DECLARATION FOR THE 

TRIMBLE AND AGNEWS MUNICIPAL GROUNDWATER WELLS 

PROJECT AND APPROVAL OF THE PROJECT’S STATUS REPORT AND 

PROJECT SCOPE 

 

 

RECOMMENDATION  

 

Adopt a resolution: 

(a) Adopting the Initial Study/Mitigated Negative Declaration for the Trimble and Agnews 
Municipal Groundwater Wells Project (File No. ER20-015) and the associated Mitigation 

Monitoring and Reporting Program, in accordance with the California Environmental 

Quality Act; and 

(b) Approving the status report and project scope for the Trimble and Agnews Municipal 
Groundwater Wells Project. 

 

 

OUTCOME  

 

Approval of the project scope and the Mitigated Negative Declaration for the Trimble and 

Agnews Municipal Groundwater Wells Project (Project) will allow staff to proceed with the final 

Project design, advertising, and award. 

 

 

BACKGROUND   

 

San José Municipal Water System’s (SJMWS) North San José/Alviso service area receives water 

from multiple sources to meet customer demands.  Wholesale water purchased from San 

Francisco Public Utilities Commission (SFPUC) along with supplemental groundwater provide 

potable water supplies to the area.  Recycled water is also distributed for non-potable uses such 

as irrigation and cooling towers.  

 

COUNCIL AGENDA: 6/29/21 

FILE: 21-1527 

ITEM: 2.14 

 



HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 

June 7, 2021 

Subject:  Trimble and Agnews Municipal Groundwater Wells Project – Mitigated Negative Declaration and 

Status 

Page 2 

 

 

The amount of imported water available to SFPUC’s retail and wholesale customers is 

constrained by hydrology, physical facilities, and the institutional parameters that allocate the 

water supply of the Tuolumne River.  The business relationship between the SFPUC and its 

wholesale customers is largely defined by the “Water Supply Agreement between the City and 

County of San Francisco and Wholesale Customers in Alameda County, San Mateo County and 

Santa Clara County” (WSA) entered into in July 2009, and amended and restated in 2018.  This 

25-year WSA replaced the 1984 Settlement Agreement and Master Water Sales Contract and 

will expire on June 30, 2034, unless extended by two additional five-year option terms.  San 

Francisco has a perpetual commitment (Supply Assurance) to deliver 184 million gallons per day 

(MGD) to its 24 permanent wholesale customers collectively.  San José and Santa Clara are not 

included in the Supply Assurance commitment and each has temporary and interruptible water 

supply contracts with San Francisco equal to 4.5 MGD.  Potable water use in the North San 

José/Alviso service area is currently 4.25 MGD and is projected to increase to 9.4 MGD by 

2045. 

 

In the 2009 WSA, the SFPUC committed to make three decisions before 2018 that affect water 

supply development: 

 

• Whether or not to make the cities of San José and Santa Clara permanent customers, 

• Whether or not to supply the additional unmet supply needs of the Wholesale Customers 

beyond 2018, and 

• Whether or not to increase the wholesale customer Supply Assurance above 184 MGD. 

Events since 2009 made it difficult for the SFPUC to conduct the necessary water supply 

planning and CEQA analysis required to make these three decisions before 2018.  Therefore, in 

the 2018 Amended and Restated WSA, the decisions were deferred for 10 years to 2028. 

 

In December 2018, the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) adopted amendments to 

the Water Quality Control Plan for the San Francisco Bay/Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta 

Estuary (Bay-Delta Plan Amendment) to establish water quality objectives to maintain the health 

of the Bay-Delta ecosystem.  If the Bay-Delta Plan Amendment is implemented, the SFPUC will 

be able to meet the projected water demands in normal years but would experience supply 

shortages in single dry years or multiple dry years, resulting in supplies to wholesale customers 

reduced between 40-50% during some multi-year drought periods. 

 

 

ANALYSIS   

 

Project Description 

 

The Project would construct four new municipal groundwater production wells along with 

associated connections to the existing potable water distribution system to secure additional 



HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 

June 7, 2021 

Subject:  Trimble and Agnews Municipal Groundwater Wells Project – Mitigated Negative Declaration and 

Status 

Page 3 

 

 

potable groundwater water supplies for SJMWS’ North San José/Alviso service area.  One well 

is proposed at the Trimble site and three wells are proposed at the Agnews site.  These wells 

would be used to provide additional water supply to the service area in both normal and dry-year 

(drought) conditions.  

 

The Project is located on two sites in SJMWS’ North San José/Alviso service area: the Trimble 

site and the Agnews site (Attachment A).  The Trimble site is an existing City facility at 491 

West Trimble Road.  The Agnews site is on a portion of the proposed 22-acre Agnews East 

Parklands Project area located off Zanker Road, near the corner of Cabrillo Road and Center 

Road, at the former Agnews Hospital site.  Both locations are City-owned properties, which will 

allow for increased ability to ensure the safety and security of the potable water supply sources.  

By locating wells adjacent to other existing and future City facilities SJMWS will be able to 

reduce the State-required source water protection zone, thereby minimizing the total area 

required to be set aside for the groundwater well facilities.  SJMWS staff has coordinated with 

the Department of Parks, Recreation & Neighborhood Services to identify the optimal location 

for groundwater wells within the future Agnews park area, and will continue this coordination to 

ensure the final well site enclosures blend in to the aesthetic of the final park design.  Staff is 

continuing conversations with developers and other City departments to secure land for 

additional groundwater wells that will also be needed for future water supplies. 

 

The scope of the project is described in detail in Chapter 3 of the Initial Study, which is available 

at Trimble and Agnews Municipal Groundwater Wells IS/MND.  The project will be bid in two 

phases.  The first phase will include drilling boreholes up to 800 feet in depth and installing steel 

casings, gravel packs, and contamination sealants/screenings.  The data from the first phase will 

be used to design the project’s second phase, which will include installation of submersible 

pumps and motors, and the additional necessary infrastructure to operate the groundwater well 

and connect the groundwater source to the existing distribution system.  Both phases will be 

awarded after competitive bidding.  

 

Initial Study and Mitigated Negative Declaration 

 

On March 16, 2021, the Director of Planning, Building, and Code Enforcement circulated an 

Initial Study/Draft Mitigated Negative Declaration for a 20-day public review by posting it on 

the City’s website in conformance with the requirement of the California Environmental Quality 

Act (CEQA).  The circulation date was subsequently extended by seven days and ended on April 

12, 2021.  Eleven comment letters or emails were received from interested parties and public 

agencies including Santa Clara County, Valley Water, Santa Clara Unified School District, and 

the City of San José, Parks, Recreation and Neighborhood Services.  The comments were minor 

corrections to the text in the Initial Study and concerns about public safety, added noise, location 

of wells at the Agnews site, and impacts on Agnews East Park Design.  The comments did not 

result in changes to the analysis.  Any future design work will be reviewed to make sure that it 

falls within the Initial Study and Mitigated Negative Declaration.   

 

https://www.sanjoseca.gov/your-government/departments-offices/planning-building-code-enforcement/planning-division/environmental-planning/environmental-review/negative-declaration-initial-studies/trimble-and-agnews-water-production-wells-project
https://www.sanjoseca.gov/your-government/departments-offices/planning-building-code-enforcement/planning-division/environmental-planning/environmental-review/negative-declaration-initial-studies/trimble-and-agnews-water-production-wells-project


HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 

June 7, 2021 

Subject:  Trimble and Agnews Municipal Groundwater Wells Project – Mitigated Negative Declaration and 

Status 

Page 4 

 

 

CONCLUSION   

 

Staff recommends approval of the status report and project scope, and the adoption of the 

Mitigated Negative Declaration for the Trimble and Agnews Municipal Groundwater Wells 

Project.  This will allow staff to proceed with the final Project design and advertising. 

 

 

EVALUATION AND FOLLOW-UP  

 

Staff will bid the construction work and return to the City Council for award of any Major Public 

Works construction contract which is outside the Director’s award authority. 

 

 

CLIMATE SMART SAN JOSE 

 

The recommendation in this memo has no effect on Climate Smart San José energy, water, or 

mobility goals. 

  

 

POLICY ALTERNATIVES 

 

Alternative #1: Purchase privately owned land as an alternative groundwater well location 

Pros: More land area left available at Agnews site for future park development 

Cons: Results in more expensive construction project that leads to higher water rates; delays 

development of water supplies by years to allow for identification of land, purchase negotiations, 

land acquisition contract process, and new CEQA analysis; alternative location may not produce 

equal groundwater supplies as proposed location, which would require construction of more 

wells than what’s proposed in the recommended project. 

Reason for not recommending: Additional water supplies are needed now for the community 

due to the uncertainty surrounding future SFPUC supply reliability. 

 

 
PUBLIC OUTREACH  

 

Staff from the Environmental Services and Parks, Recreation and Neighborhood Services 

Departments met with the River Oaks Neighborhood Association at its May 5, 2021 meeting to 

provide information to the group and answer their questions about this project.  This 

memorandum will be posted on the City’s Council Agenda website for the June 29, 2021 

Council Meeting. 

 

 

  



HONORABLE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 

June 7, 2021 

Subject:  Trimble and Agnews Municipal Groundwater Wells Project – Mitigated Negative Declaration and 

Status 

Page 5 

 

 

COORDINATION  

 

This memorandum has been coordinated with the Department of Planning, Building and Code 

Enforcement, the Department of Parks, Recreation and Neighborhood Services, and the City 

Attorney’s Office.  

 

 

COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION/INPUT  

 

No commission recommendation or input is associated with this action. 

 

 

CEQA   

 

Trimble and Agnes Municipal Groundwater Wells Project Initial Study and Mitigated Negative 

Declaration, Planning File No. ER20-015. 

 

 

 

           /s/ 

       KERRIE ROMANOW 

       Director of Environmental Services 

 

 

For questions, please contact Jeff Provenzano, Deputy Director, Water Resources Division, at 

Jeffrey.Provenzano@sanjoseca.gov. 

 

Attachment: Attachment A, Map of Project Area 



1st St

Zanker Rd

AGNEWS SITES

TRIMBLE SITE

Center Rd Cabrillo Rd

UV237

Tasman Dr

§̈¦880

£¤101

1st St

Lafayette St

Gu
ada

lup
e P

ky

Bro
kaw

 Rd

Zanker Rd

Great Mall Pky

Tas
ma

n D
r

Mon
tagu

e Ex
py

Mo
nta

gu
e E

xpy

Trim
ble 

Rd

SOURCE: ESA, 2020

Pacific Ocean

VallejoVallejo

OaklandOakland

HaywardHayward
FremontFremont

ConcordConcord

San JoseSan Jose

BerkeleyBerkeley

SunnyvaleSunnyvale

SanSan
FranciscoFrancisco

Marin

Solano

Alameda

San Mateo

Contra Costa

Santa Clara

San Francisco

!

Project Area

Pa
th:

 U
:\G

IS
\G

IS
\P

ro
jec

ts\
19

xx
xx

\D
19

09
66

.03
 M

un
i W

ate
r G

ro
un

dw
at

er
 W

ell
s\F

ig1
-1

_L
oc

ati
on

_M
ap

.m
xd

,  
sd

ula
va

  7
/22

/20
20

0 0.5
MilesN

ATTACHMENT A


	6-29 Council Memo_Agnews and Trimble_FINAL_DO approved 6-8-21 with JM Edits
	Attachment A Groundwells

